
        The Evening: No Deal, Iran’s Defense, Won’t Get Fooled Again and More
March 13, 2019737 Max Grounded
President Trump on Wednesday said the Federal Aviation Administration would ground Boeing Co.’s fleet of 737 MAX airliners, as the WSJ’s Andrew Tangel, Robert Wall and Alex Leary  report.


UK Lawmakers Reject No-Deal
Having twice thrown out Prime Minister Theresa May’s plan for Britain’s withdrawal from the European Union, the fractious British Parliament on Wednesday also rejected the idea of a disorderly “no-deal” exit from the bloc. And, as the New York Times’ Stephen Castle  reports, there is great uncertainty on next steps.

Dive Deeper: “Political Chaos as May’s Brexit Plan Goes Down in Flames,” by the Atlantic Council’s John Roberts.


Iran Threatens Defense Overhaul
A senior Iranian security official on Wednesday accused regional powers of spending money on “suspicious nuclear projects”, and warned that such threats would force Tehran to revise its defense strategy. Ali Shamkhani, the secretary of Iran’s Supreme National Security Council, did not name the countries - but a proposed transfer of U.S. nuclear technology to Saudi Arabia has raised concerns in Tehran, as Reuters’  reports.

Dive Deeper: “War by Proxy: Iran’s Growing Footprint in the Middle East,” by CSIS’s Seth Jones.


U.S. Looks to Test Ground-Launched Cruise Missile in August
The United States is aiming to test a ground-launched cruise missile with a range of about 1,000 kilometers (621 miles) in August, a Pentagon official said on Wednesday, after Washington announced that it plans to withdraw from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, as Reuters’ Idrees Ali  reports.

Dive Deeper: Visit CSIS’s interactive “Missile Threat” micro-website.


Your Questions
Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Video Shorts
Check out CSIS’s new series of video shorts: “Testify” and “High Resolution.” In under 90 seconds, CSIS experts tell you what they told Congress in testimony, or use high-resolution satellite images and advanced mapping to break down national security issues. And don’t forget to  subscribe to the CSIS YouTube Channel!


In That Number

15.5
NATO as whole spends 15.5 times more on military forces than Russia, and NATO Europe alone spends 4 times as much.

Source:  CSIS


Critical Quote


“Unsustainable human activities globally have degraded the Earth’s ecosystems, endangering the ecological foundations of society.”


— United Nations Global Environmental Outlook

iDeas Lab

A new brief on  Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps-Quds Force (IRGC-QF) offers a database of Israeli attacks against targets in Syria, which provides a useful indicator of Iranian activity.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics

(Photo credit: Frederick Florin/AFP/Getty Images). Nigel Farage gestures as he speaks during a debate on the preparation of the upcoming European Council meeting of March 21 and 22 and UK's withdrawal from the EU during a plenary session at the European Parliament.

Recommended Reading
“How I Would Cover the College-Admissions Scandal as a Foreign Correspondent,” by the  New Yorker’s Masha Gessen.


This Town Tomorrow

Starting at  9:30 a.m., CSIS will host Dr. Kiron Skinner, Director of Policy Planning, U.S. Department of State, in a discussion on the approach of the Trump administration in stabilizing fragile states.

Then at  12:15 p.m., the Council on Foreign Relations will hold a panel discussion on the importance of democracy in promoting global health.

And finally, at  2:00 p.m., the Brookings Institute will host Undersecretary of the United States Army Ryan McCarthy for a discussion on the Army’s most recent budget proposal request and its future defense strategy.

Video
CSIS today held a book forum, discussing the IMF’s latest work titled The Future of China’s Bond Market. The Forum featured remarks by the book’s three authors, along with commentary from other experts. Watch the full event  here.


Podcasts

The Smart Women, Smart Power biweekly podcast features powerful, in-depth conversations with women leaders from around the globe who are experts in foreign policy, national security, international business, and international development.

Listen on  SoundCloud,  Apple Podcasts, or  Spotify.


Smiles
“Meet the new boss/the same as the old boss….”

The Who at Live Aid—come on! One of the things I love about  this timeless performance is it is enduring even down to their wardrobe. Most of the bands that performed at Live Aid had a distinctly 80s look which time hasn’t proven kind to. But check out Pete and the boys. My teenage sons today rock that type of look (with their shirts buttoned up of course…)

       