
        The Evening: No Rush to Denuclearize, Kashmir, Zevon and More
February 18, 2019No Rush to Denuclearize
President Trump said today that there was “no rush” to denuclearize North Korea, whose leader, Kim Jong Un, he’s meeting with next week, as Politico’s Rebecca Morin  reports.

Meanwhile, as the WSJ’s Andrew Jeong and Timothy Martin  report, Kim Jong Un has exiled, imprisoned or executed suspected opponents of his diplomatic outreach to the U.S. and South Korea, while also targeting his country’s moneyed elite with asset seizures, according to a new report that details a purge of some 50 to 70 individuals.
 
Kashmir
Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan said on Tuesday Pakistan would retaliate if India attacked in response to a bombing in the disputed Kashmir region, which India blamed on Pakistan, as Reuters’ Asif Shahzad and Fayaz Bukhari  report.
 
China Trade Talks
The U.S. is asking China to keep the value of the yuan stable as part of trade negotiations between the world’s two largest economies, a move aimed at neutralizing any effort by Beijing to devalue its currency to counter American tariffs, as Bloomberg  reports.

Dive Deeper : “Measuring Trump's 2018 Trade Protection: Five Takeaways,” by Peterson’s Chad Bown and Eva Zhang.

“Trump’s Trade Warrior Takes the Fight to Beijing,” by CFR’s Edward Alden.
 
Your Questions
Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.
 
By The Numbers
Sign up to receive CSIS’s new Sunday morning newsletter By The Numbers. Each week, we’ll share with you some of the most compelling numbers, statistics, and data in our studies. Subscribe here.
 
In That Number

336
There have been at least 336 chemical weapons attacks over the course of the Syrian civil war – significantly more than has commonly been known. Around 98 percent of these attacks can be attributed to the Assad regime, with ISIS responsible for the rest.

Source:  Global Public Policy Institute
 
Critical Quote


“As long as there's no testing, I'm in no rush.”

— President Trump said of North Korean denuclearization.
 
iDeas Lab
 

 
Located 250 km north of the DMZ, North Korea's Sangnam-ni missile operating base is equipped with Hwasong-10 intermediate-range ballistic missiles and is an important component of their first-strike capabilities.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.
 
Optics
 


(Photo credit: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images). The largest Supermoon of 2019 today over London.
 
Recommended Reading
“The Game Has Changed: Rethinking the U.S. Role in Supporting Elections in Sub-Saharan Africa,” by CSIS’s Judd Devermont.
 
This Town Tomorrow

At  9:45 a.m., the Hudson Institute will host a discussion with Romanian ambassador George Maior about the Romanian Presidency of the European Union.

And at  1:30 p.m., Brookings will host discussions examining the impact of kaizen - the Japanese style management approach - in African countries and other developing countries like Brazil, the Philippines, and Vietnam.

Video
Does the U.S. withdrawal from North Syria spell conflict between the Syria’s Kurds and Turkey, or can more bloodshed be avoided? CSIS’s Turkey Project director Bulent Aliriza explains what’s happening in North Syria. Watch it  here.
 
Podcasts
 


Hosted by Bonnie S. Glaser, the ChinaPower Podcast dissects critical issues underpinning China’s emergence as a global power. The newest episode of ChinaPower explores the relationship between China and the current postwar international order.

Listen on  SoundCloud,  Apple Podcasts, or  Spotify.
 
Smiles
Thanks to all for the great notes about Linda Ronstadt and her recently issued live album “Live in Hollywood” recorded in 1980. One of my favorite tracks from the collection is her cover of Warren Zevon’s “Poor, Poor, Pitiful Me.” This of course, got me on a Zevon kick.

Zevon was incomparable in many ways. Take this performance of his famous “Lawyers, Guns and Money.” Nothing like it before or since.      