
        The Future of Statecraft
      Tuesday, April 2, 2019 9:00 am - 4:45 pmCSIS Headquarters  Registration

 
The event will be webcast live from this page.


Due to space restrictions advanced RSVPS are required for this event and will be re-confirmed via email from the Smart Women, Smart Power Initiative.  Credentialed members of the press will receive instructions as part of a separate confirmation issued by the Office of External Relations

The Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) and the Henry A. Kissinger Center for Global Affairs at Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS) are pleased to host another conference as part of the Future Strategy Forum, an initiative to connect scholars who research national security with its leading practitioners. 




The 2019 focus is “The Future of Statecraft” and will examine the future of great power cooperation, international institutions, and economic statecraft. The conference will feature a keynote conversation with former National Security Advisor Ambassador Susan Rice. 

Conference Schedule

8:30 AM - 9:00 AM   Registration and Breakfast
 
9:00 AM - 9:15 AM   Welcome Remarks

Dr. Kathleen Hicks
Senior Vice President; Henry A. Kissinger Chair; Director, International Security Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies
 
Dr. Francis Gavin
Giovanni Agnelli Distinguished Professor and Director Henry A. Kissinger Center for Global Affairs Johns Hopkins SAIS
 
Ms. Sara Plana and Ms. Rachel Tecott 
PhD Candidates, Political Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

 
9:15 AM - 10:45 AM  Panel 1: “Great Power Cooperation” 

Ambassador Linda Thomas Greenfield
Distinguished Resident Fellow in African Studies, Institute for the Study of Diplomacy, Georgetown University
    
Dr. Alina Polyakova
David M. Rubenstein Fellow, Center on the United States and Europe and Security Strategy, Brookings Institution
       
Dr. Jessica Chen Weiss
Associate Professor of Government, Cornell University
 
Dr. Irene Wu
Former Fellow, Wilson Center and Georgetown University



10:45 AM - 11:00 AM   Coffee Break
 
11:00 AM - 12:30 PM  Panel 2: “International Institutions”

Dr. Esther Brimmer
Executive Director and CEO, NAFSTA: Association of International Educators
 
Ms. Heather Conley
Senior Vice President for Europe, Eurasia, and the Arctic; and Director, Europe Program

Ms. Naima Green
PhD Candidate, Harvard University

Dr. Kristina Spohr
Helmut Schmidt Distinguished Professor, Henry A. Kissinger Center for Global Affairs
 
Dr. Mischa Thompson (Moderator)
Policy Advisor, U.S. Commission on Security and Cooperating in Europe

12:30 PM - 1:45 PM   Lunch
 
1:45 PM - 3:15 PM   Panel 3: “Economic Statecraft”

Ms. Ana Quintana
Senior Policy Analyst, Latin America and the Western Hemisphere, The Heritage Foundation
 
Dr. Sarah Sewall
Speyer Family Foundation Distinguished Scholar, Henry A. Kissinger Center for Global Affairs
 
Ms. Camille Stewart, Esq.
Cybersecurity Policy Fellow, New America

Dr. Radha Iyengar Plumb (Moderator)
Adjunct Economist, RAND Corporation


3:15 PM - 3:30 PM   Coffee Break
 
3:30 PM – 4:45 PM   Keynote Discussion with Amb. Susan Rice

Ambassador Susan Rice
Former National Security Advisor and U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations
 
Dr. Kathleen Hicks (Moderator)
Senior Vice President; Henry A. Kissinger Chair; Director, International Security Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies

 
4:45 PM – 5:30 PM   Closing Reception

This event is made possible with support from Smart Women Smart Power Initiative, the Henry A. Kissinger Center for Global Affairs at Johns Hopkins SAIS, and co-creators Sara Plana and Rachel Tecott, Ph.D. candidates at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
      
              CSIS Experts
        
    
          
  
  
  
  
  
  
      

      
      
      
      
  
      
      Twitter
    
  

    
  
  Kathleen H. Hicks

      Senior Vice President; Henry A. Kissinger Chair; Director, International Security Program
  
  

      
      
      
      
  
      
      Twitter
    
  

    
  
  Alice Hunt Friend

      Senior Fellow, International Security Program
  
  

      
      
      
      
  
      
      Twitter
    
  

    
  
  Beverly Kirk

      Fellow and Director for Outreach, International Security Program, and Director, Smart Women, Smart Power Initiative
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

    
    
            
              Event Partners
        
    
              
    
            