
        The Evening: Brexit, Navy Siege, Bad and More
March 12, 2019Brexit
 Britain’s Parliament today soundly defeated Prime Minister Theresa May’s plan to exit the European Union, a 391 to 242 vote that is likely to delay Brexit and could derail it entirely. It is a devastating blow to Mrs. May that threatens her hold on power, as the NYT  reports. 
 Dive Deeper: “Rules, Britannia,” by CSIS’s Matthew Goodman.
 Navy Under Cyber Siege
 The Navy and its industry partners are “under cyber siege” by Chinese hackers and others who have stolen tranches of national security secrets in recent years, exploiting critical weaknesses that threaten the U.S.’s standing as the world’s top military power, an internal Navy review has concluded, as the WSJ’s Gordon Lubold and Dustin Volz  report.
 ISIS Nears Defeat in Last Enclave
 ISIS faced imminent defeat in its final enclave on Tuesday as hundreds of jihadist fighters and their families surrendered and the U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces said the battle was as good as over, as Reuters’ Rodi Said  reports.
 Dive Deeper: “Disposition of Adversary and Friendly Forces in Eastern Syria,” via the Institute for the Study of War.
 Taliban Negotiations
 U.S. and Taliban negotiators wrapped up their longest round of consecutive peace talks on Tuesday with progress made but no agreement on when foreign troops might withdraw, as Reuters’ Eric Knecht  reports.
 The Times  reported yesterday that Taliban fighters killed or captured an entire Afghan National Army company of more than 50 soldiers on Monday.
 Your Questions
 Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.
 Video Shorts
Check out CSIS’s new series of video shorts: “Testify” and “High Resolution.” In under 90 seconds, CSIS experts tell you what they told Congress in testimony, or use high-resolution satellite images and advanced mapping to break down national security issues. And don’t forget to  subscribe to the CSIS YouTube Channel!
 In That Number
30
 Today marks 30 years from world wide web inventor Tim Berners-Lee’s original proposal for an information management system.
 Source:  World Wide Web Foundation
 Critical Quote
“The presence of U.S. diplomatic staff at the embassy has become a constraint on U.S. policy.”

— Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on withdrawing all diplomats from the U.S. embassy in Venezuela.
 iDeas Lab
  CSIS's Europe Program is out with  The Kremlin Playbook 2. This interactive report examines how Western democracies enable Russia's malign economic influence. 
 The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.
 Optics
  (Photo credit: Bulent Kilac/AFP/Getty Images). Kurdish forces pounded the Islamic State's embattled holdout of Baghouz in Eastern Syria.
 Recommended Reading
 An important new book by Farah Pandith is available today, “How We Win: How Cutting-Edge Entrepreneurs, Political Visionaries, Enlightened Business Leaders, and Social Media Mavens Can Defeat the Extremist Threat.”
 NPR’s Steve Inskeep  spoke with Pandith this morning.
 This Town Tomorrow
At  9:00 a.m., join CSIS for a workshop on the research results of the Project on Advanced Systems and Concepts for Countering WMD.
 Later, at  2:00 p.m., return to CSIS for a presentation of the main findings from the IMF’s new book, The Future of China’s Bond Market and remarks from David Lipton, first deputy managing director of the IMF.
 And, at  12:00 p.m., the Hudson Institute will hold a discussion on a new report, "The Importance of Reform from a Transatlantic Perspective," focusing on World Trade Organization reform.
Video
 CSIS today hosted a report launch of Rebooting the Innovation Agenda: The Need for Resilient Institutions, along with a discussion on the role institutions will play in the fourth industrial revolution and how countries can innovate without disrupting political and economic stability. Watch the full event  here.
 Podcasts
  Energy 360° examines the energy landscape from the intersection of policy, markets, technologies, and geopolitics. With commentary from leading energy and CSIS experts, we provide context and perspective on the most critical issues shaping energy today. 
 Listen on  SoundCloud and Apple Podcasts.
 Smiles
 While Queen’s performance at Live Aid was the most memorable, it wasn’t the only memorable performance by any stretch. A very young U2 mesmerized us all with this performance of “Bad.”  
      