
        U.S.-China Trade Talks and the CBO Report
February 4, 2019
    Andrew Schwartz: I'm Scott.


    Bill Reinsch: I'm Bill.


    Bill Reinsch: And we're The Trade Guys.


    Andrew Schwartz: And we're The Trade Guys.


    Andrew Schwartz: You're listening to The Trade Guys, a podcast produced by
    CSIS where we talk about trade in terms that everyone can understand. I'm
    H. Andrew Schwartz and I'm here with Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch, the
    CSIS Trade Guys.


    Andrew Schwartz: In this episode, we'll talk about the U.S. And the Chinese
    negotiators who are this week, wrapping up talks in Washington as they try
    to hash out a deal.


    [Donald Trump via news clip]: I think that probably the final deal will be
    made, if it's made will be made between myself and President Xi.


    Andrew Schwartz: Plus, we'll talk about the Congressional budget office
    report that says that U.S. Trade barriers will hurt the economy. Finally,
    we'll talk about what Congress is doing about all of this. All, on this
    episode of the Trade Guys.


    Andrew Schwartz: Well, two-thirds of the Trade Guys are coming to you today
    from frozen Washington D.C. Although we shouldn't complain because our
    countrymen in Minnesota and in Chicago are really freezing. I hear New York
    is bad but Trade Guy Scott Miller has escaped to not quite sunny Florida
    but he's in Orlando today and Scott tells us it's about 56 and cloudy which
    is about many, many degrees warmer than it is here. Bill and I are sitting
    here, shaking. It's so cold.


    Bill Reinsch: When I got in my car this morning, it was seven. [crosstalk
    00:01:28].


    Bill Reinsch: It was seven. Seven degrees. By the time I got to CSIS, it
    was 10.


    Andrew Schwartz: 10 degrees at CSIS.


    Bill Reinsch: Well outside.


    Andrew Schwartz: How are you doing down there, Scott?


    Scott Miller: Just fine. Having a great, relaxing week. I won't gloat and
    well it's cooler than we expected. It's definitely warmer than any place
    else we would have been in northerly latitudes.


    Andrew Schwartz: Good. Well, you're kind to join the Trade Guys today from
    a remote location. We've got a lot to talk about. First, China. The
    negotiations between the administration led by Bob Lighthizer with Vice
    Premier Liu are concluding today in Washington, concluding where President
    Trump will meet with Liu and the hopes are, at least reported by Bob Davis
    and Lingling Wei of The Wall Street Journal is that China's counting on a
    meeting between President Trump and President Xi, sometime after the
    President's meeting with the North Korean leader in February to settle this
    trade fight.


    Andrew Schwartz: What do you guys think of this? Scott, do you want to
    weight in first since you're far, far away?


    Scott Miller: Sure. I think how we always expected this thing to play out
    that ultimately China would not be able to conclude an agreement that did
    not have Xi's stamp on it nor would the U.S. conclude an agreement without
    the President's stamp since he has personalized this to such an extent.
    Clearly, that's what the tweets from President Trump announced today. For
    me, the more important question is what the substance of the deal is rather
    than how it's formed. My concern is that with leaders in the room, we're
    more likely to have sort of a transactional deal instead of a
    transformational one. But, we can talk more about that.


    Andrew Schwartz: Right. So, Trump today as you mentioned, Scott, tweeted,
    "No final deal will be made until my friend, President Xi and I meet in the
    near future to discuss and agree on some of the long-standing and more
    difficult points." That seems like a pretty reasonable tweet. What do you
    think, Bill?


    Bill Reinsch: You could see it coming miles and miles away. The President
    has to be the center. He has to be the center of attention. He has to be
    the decision maker. He wants to make the one to cut the deal. The fact that
    he tweeted that and flagged it tells me, I think that he's certainly open
    to a deal. I think would like to come away from that meeting with, waving a
    piece of paper and say, "I did it." And of course, as we've all discussed
    many times here, it will be the greatest deal in the world and certainly
    better than-


    Andrew Schwartz: A beautiful deal.


    Bill Reinsch: It'll be a beautiful deal. It'll be better than anything that
    his predecessors negotiated. He wants to be the one to do it which actually
    makes sense anyway. Nobody should be surprised because this whole thing was
    set up at his level in Buenos Aires and it makes sense that it would
    conclude at his level and he has been very clear on many issues for the
    last two years that he really is his own U.S. Trade representative. He has
    not hesitated to reject things that any of his trade advisors have brought
    him. So, it rests on his shoulders.


    Andrew Schwartz: Yeah, so is the pressure on him to make the deal?


    Scott Miller: Well, it's always been on him when you really step back from
    it. He's the one who picked the fight. He's the one who escalated it and
    made it personal. Frankly, it's his reelection next year which is in
    jeopardy if the economy declines as a result of a bad deal or no deal.


    Andrew Schwartz: So, does he take blame for that? I mean, does he get
    blamed for that?


    Bill Reinsch: Well, I think there's a bunch of people in the administration
    on this one who are going to do their best to save him from himself and try
    to make sure that whatever gets on the table for this final meeting is as
    airtight as they can possibly make it. There's going to, I think everybody
    figures, there's going to be three components, a market access component
    where the only question is, is it going to be big enough for Trump? You can
    probably figure that out in advance. There will be a structural change
    component which we've talked about before which I think cannot possibly go
    100% of the way to where what we want. But, has to be more cosmetic so
    people won't laugh at it.


    Bill Reinsch: And then I think what you're going to see a lot of February
    taking up with is a very fraught negotiation over compliance, enforcement
    and monitoring. Ambassador Lighthizer in particular, he's not the only one
    really believes that the Chinese will not honor their commitments and that
    you need a lot of monitoring systems, you need a lot of deadlines, you need
    a lot of snapback provisions built in so that if they don't honor it, we
    get to do certain things in response.


    Andrew Schwartz: There's real consequences.


    Bill Reinsch: There's real consequences. All that stuff needs to be
    negotiated. I've had to do that with the Chinese and when I was in the
    government. They really hate that because for them, these are all
    violations and infringements on their sovereignty which is an exaggeration
    but that's what they think.


    Andrew Schwartz: And they feel like it's a slap in the face.


    Bill Reinsch: Yes. Yes. Well it is actually and they're right to feel that
    way. But they also have a record of not always complying so I don't think
    that Lighthizer's view is misplaced. The point is that, I think from
    Lighthizer's point of view, if you're going to put the two presidents in a
    room where they might agree to something, you want to get as much of this
    stuff possibly nailed down as you can. Trump does not have a history as a
    detailed guy and if you don't get it in the paper beforehand, it may
    disappear along the way.


    Andrew Schwartz: Isn't there some pressure on actually where the meeting is
    physically too because if it's in Hainan as the Chinese seem to hope it
    will be, it's on their turf and if Xi doesn't walk away from a deal, with a
    deal on their turf, he loses face there? Isn't there, there's some real
    optics here as well at play.


    Bill Reinsch: Oh always. Always. I would think they would end up with a
    third country venue.


    Scott Miller: Yeah. That seems most likely to me as well. Singapore or
    somewhere with at least the sheen of neutrality but have it in a third
    country. But Bill's right. The transactional part, the market access part
    is the one that's, I think easiest to predict and where it's easiest to
    declare victory. The concerns about compliance are important. What I hope
    the negotiators are actually focused on are the things that would improve
    the circumstances for markets and for U.S. participants in the Chinese
    market that are also in the interests of China because those are the ones
    that are most likely to stick over the long-term. They'll need less ongoing
    monitoring.


    Scott Miller: Things like getting rid of joint venture requirements for
    foreign investors which is good for China in terms of boosting the return
    on investment and therefore making investments more likely. But it's also
    good for the intellectual property of the foreign firms because they have
    less influence from Chinese cronies on the board who cause intellectual
    properties to leak. So, things like that or anything to improve the
    contestability of the banking and financial services sector, banking,
    insurance payment systems which are not particularly contestable now.
    Making them more contestable is good for China's economy. It forestalls or
    perhaps even prevents a banking crisis which may be in the cards if the
    system stays closed but also it would improve circumstances for U.S. firms
    contesting the market.


    Bill Reinsch: I'm glad you mentioned the joint venture thing because that
    is the one thing that they can do that is really important and would make a
    difference I think to the fundamental change, structural changes that the
    administration is looking for. There's been some debate lately about the
    new foreign investment law that they promulgated in the, presumably their
    legislature will pass in March which has a lot of loopholes, a lot of
    exceptions like a national security exception that sort of swallows the
    rule. But, what has happened in China a good bit is that the Chinese
    government doesn't usually demand technology transfer as a condition of
    allowing companies to go in. They said in their WTO accession, they
    wouldn't do that and they stuck with that.


    Bill Reinsch: But what happens is they say, "If you want to come in, you
    have to have a joint venture partner." And then the joint venture partner
    demands the technology transfer and says, "I won't be your partner if you
    don't." And the Chinese government can say, "We have clean hands. We
    haven't demanded anything. What the companies negotiate amongst themselves
    is up to them and not something that we can dictate," which by the way
    would continue to be permitted I think in their new proposed law. But if
    they get rid of the requirement that you have to have a joint venture, that
    allows companies to come in and avoid a lot of that. So, Scott is exactly
    right on that. It's an important, really important issue.


    Andrew Schwartz: Well, so far though, the Chinese, this week in Washington
    and we're taping this on Thursday, basically they delivered a package of
    very modest concessions. Why is there optimism if they're only delivering
    modest concessions? I mean Trump has said, in fact he tweeted, "China does
    not want an increase in tariffs and feels they will do much better if they
    make a deal. They are correct."


    Bill Reinsch: Who said that was optimism?


    Andrew Schwartz: I'd sense in the press that there's some momentum and
    there's some optimism. I don't sense that from the Trade Guys.


    Scott Miller: I think that there's optimism that things will not break down
    completely and will have tariff escalation and decoupling. So there's that
    much optimism in the markets but I think you've got a, the notion of
    optimism on these deals is quite fungible because remember the NAFTA was
    the worst trade agreement in the history of the Earth or at least since the
    continents formed. It's the worst trade agreement ever. It was changed in
    relatively, relatively modest ways and now it's the best ever, it's the
    best and biggest ever. So, the declaration of victory is not nearly as
    important as avoiding the downside.


    Scott Miller: To continue the NAFTA analogy, what traders really feared was
    the loss of NAFTA entirely and the downside risk was greatly minimized once
    USMCA was agreed even if there wasn't much upside. So I think that's,
    you've got to calibrate it. The public statement, particularly the
    statements of the administration are often at odds with the real sentiment
    of the traders themselves.


    Bill Reinsch: We had a meeting here last week with a bunch of people that
    think about this a lot. Some companies, CSIS people, other think tanks,
    some foreign embassy representatives, not Chinese and one of the questions
    that was asked was sort of what do you think is going to happen? And about
    two-thirds of them thought the most likely outcome by March 2nd was
    basically a punt. Continue talking, not enough progress to close a deal but
    enough progress to continue negotiations without further tariffs, no
    lifting, no imposition.


    Bill Reinsch: Most of the rest thought there would be a what was
    characterized as a small deal, not really defined but which I would say is
    you know, a big marketing access package but something slightly more than
    cosmetic on the structural change issue and not much more than that and
    some enforcement provisions. But, I don't think there's raging optimism in
    town that this is all going to have a happy ending in the short term.


    Andrew Schwartz: Switching gears a bit, speaking of happy endings. This
    week, the Congressional budget office came out with a new report that says
    that U.S. Trade barriers will hurt the US economy. They said, "U.S. Trade
    barriers will hurt rather than help the economy and levies that President
    Trump is imposed on items including steel, aluminum and some other Chinese
    goods will cut real gross domestic product by about 0.1% on average through
    2029 and it's going to fuel uncertainty among investors which may further
    reduce U.S. Output."


    Andrew Schwartz: Scott, what do you think of that?


    Scott Miller: Well, in some ways if you've taken anything beyond a basic
    course in economics, it's kind of a blinding glimpse of the obvious. Look,
    trade barriers are, they're taxes basically. Any time you add taxes, you'll
    slow growth and almost every trade economist would agree that the ideal
    circumstance for growth are no barriers to trade at all. Now that's very
    difficult to achieve. And in fact the U.S. Economy, while it is massively
    open in many respects, does not have zero barriers. So basically Hong Kong
    and Singapore are the two economies in the world who actually execute this
    principle with no trade barriers.


    Scott Miller: But the ideal position for economic growth is always open
    markets and any time you add barriers whether they're tariffs or quotas or
    whatever it might be, those taxes on, border taxes or other frictions added
    to the system will always slow down growth. So, the fact that that's the
    conclusion is not surprising. The dimension does help because CBO has done
    a pretty fair job and it's very similar to things we've seen from other
    research institutes, the Mercatus Center published some things about this.
    I believe the Cato Institute has published on it. So having the official
    government record keeper and the Congressional budget office weigh in and
    the magnitude of the total economic losses is roughly in line with those
    previous private reports.


    Scott Miller: But the fact that it does that is not surprising. I hope
    somebody's paying attention because in a $17 trillion economy, even a tenth
    of a percent of growth matters.


    Andrew Schwartz: That's right.


    Scott Miller: It's real money. It's real jobs.


    Bill Reinsch: It is real money but Scott, were you surprised it wasn't
    bigger than that? I was.


    Scott Miller: I wasn't because this about the order of magnitude that the
    private studies have shown. The fact is because the U.S. economy is so
    large and almost or a little over two-thirds of it is domestic economy.
    Keep in mind trade is a big but it's only about a third of economy. About
    80% of trade is goods whereas about 80% of the U.S. Economy is services.
    So, there's a lot of things going on in the U.S. economy that would offset
    this. When you look at, actually we've had this conversation a number of
    times which is when the tariffs go on, nobody can find it in the monthly
    employment or growth numbers and one of the reasons is the actual effect
    versus the broad stimulus that's going on in tax cuts and other spending is
    relatively large on a macro standpoint by an order of magnitude or so than
    the effects of trade per se.


    Bill Reinsch: There's something else going on that I'm going to write in my
    column about this week that is really interesting and I have to think about
    it some more but-


    Andrew Schwartz: But we're going to get a preview here.


    Bill Reinsch: We're going to get a preview yes, a trailer, you know.


    Andrew Schwartz: Good.


    Bill Reinsch: The McKinsey Global Institute put out a report that concluded
    that while trade continued to grow in absolute terms, its share of total
    output was declining.


    Andrew Schwartz: What does that mean?


    Bill Reinsch: What it means in their study is that we're making more stuff,
    more stuff is being consumed domestically and not going across borders and
    this is in contrast to services and data which is what triggered this
    thought when I was listening to Scott. On the good side, what they see
    happening is really big economies like China and India are undergoing
    little, medium consumer booms of their own. People are buying more stuff in
    China and India and they're buying Chinese and Indian stuff. They're
    developing supply chains in country and basically they're developing
    domestic markets which is exactly what we've been urging them to do for a
    long time, to base their economic growth on consumption and not on exports.


    Bill Reinsch: So this is healthy. What it does mean though is that while
    exports grow, they're not growing as much relative to growth in services
    and data transfers which are big American economic strengths. The extent
    that tariffs apply entirely to goods, really, you can see why the impact
    maybe wasn't as big as at least I would have thought because I'm not as
    smart as Scott is.


    Andrew Schwartz: No one is as smart as Scott is.


    Bill Reinsch: This is true. No one is as smart as Scott is but part of it
    is because as Scott said, our economy is increasingly a services economy
    which is in a way good because that's in the area of global growth.


    Andrew Schwartz: Well, so one thing though to keep in mind for those
    listening out here, the CBO, the Congressional Budget Office is nonpartisan
    and so how seriously are both sides of the aisle going to take this report?


    Bill Reinsch: Well, both sides of the aisle are famous for, if they agree
    with it, they'll exploit and if they don't, they'll ignore it.


    Scott Miller: That's been the pattern for decades with CBO's work
    unfortunately on any subject, not just on trade policy.


    Andrew Schwartz: But people like you guys respect the work and economists
    respect the work and one of the things that shows here also in their report
    was by 2022, real private investment will be down by three-tenths of a
    percent. That's real money too.


    Scott Miller: That for me is the concerning part of the report. We've
    talked about it before on our program which is the uncertainty is the enemy
    of prosperity. What you really want to raise growth rates and to keep them
    growing, keep them at sustainable high levels is a predictable business
    environment. Predictability is best and for me, the real harm that's been
    done by the President and his team with the continuing threats of tariffs
    and quotas, the continuing threats of pulling out of agreements is created
    uncertainty within both the domestic and international economy that is
    ultimately damaging to the interests of those of us who feel like growth
    solves so many problems that you want as much of it as you can get.


    Bill Reinsch: The thing that's depressing about that and I think you're
    right. I think the depressing part about it is that it's deliberate.


    Scott Miller: Oh yeah.


    Bill Reinsch: If you listen to the President, he thinks uncertainty is good
    because it keeps his negotiating partners off balance and increases his
    leverage. That may be true but at the same time as Scott pointed out, it
    keeps everybody else off balance too. When they're off balance, the first
    thing they do is they hold on to their money. They don't invest and if they
    don't invest, then we don't grow. Trump doesn't seem to see the connection
    between the uncertainty he's creating for the Chinese and the uncertainty
    he's creating for the American business community by the same actions.


    Andrew Schwartz: Let's switch gears a little bit. Since we're talking about
    Congressional Budget Office, does Congress understand this issue? I mean
    there's couple of pieces of legislation that are going to be floated in
    Congress next week. Tell us about that.


    Bill Reinsch: It's going to reflect Congressional division. There are two
    bills coming up that, they're not coming up for consideration. They're
    going to be introduced that are essentially polar opposites. One of them,
    from Senator Toomey and Senator Warner and others and some people in the
    House side. This one is bipartisan would reign in the President's tariff
    authority, particular with the steel in aluminum tariffs.


    Andrew Schwartz: Restoring more power to the Congress.


    Bill Reinsch: Restoring, it would require, President wants to impose
    tariffs for national security reasons which is that Section 232 issue that
    we've talked about. He would have to get Congressional approval each time
    before he can do it and the interesting thing about the bill is it's
    retroactive. So, it would have to go back and cover the tariffs. Congress
    would have to approve the tariffs that he has already imposed which makes
    the business community happy because they don't like them.


    Bill Reinsch: At the same time, Congressman Duffy from Wisconsin and I
    think 18 other, I believe Republican House members are going to introduce a
    bill that would give the President more tariff authority, more authority to
    raise tariffs if he found that reciprocity was lacking. This is what will
    become known I think as the Navarro Bill because-


    Andrew Schwartz: So this is Sean Duffy, Republican of Wisconsin?


    Bill Reinsch: Yes. So that goes in exactly the opposite direction.


    Andrew Schwartz: Why is this called the Navarro Bill after Peter Navarro?


    Bill Reinsch: Because he's been pushing it.


    Andrew Schwartz: Okay.


    Bill Reinsch: And he met with them and encouraged them to do it to give the
    President more authority. I think that if you want an opinion, fearless
    forecast here. Neither one is going to get across the finish line. The
    Democrats are not going to bring up a bill that gives Trump more authority
    so I think that one's Deal A.


    Andrew Schwartz: It would seem so.


    Bill Reinsch: The other, people have said kind things about it. Senator
    Grassley has said kind things about it but I think that Senator McConnell
    has been pretty clear over the last two years. He doesn't like to bring to
    the floor bills that the President's not going to sign. The President's not
    going to sign a bill that restricts his authority on tariffs. I think it's
    mostly an effort, I think it's an effort, a giant game in his effort to
    pressure him to A, not do it anymore particularly on cars because that's
    looming. Two weeks that report is due and to pressure him to get rid of the
    ones he's already done. But, I don't think you're going to see floor action
    on either one of them.


    Scott Miller: I actually agree with your analysis and forecast of these
    bills. For me, this is like a 100-year-old argument that we keep having.
    Our friend, Gary Hufbauer, formerly of the Peterson Institute, points out
    to the, a Trading with the Enemy Act of 1915 as the first major
    Congressional delegation of power to the executive to restrict foreign
    commerce. And so, this debate's been going on. The constitution gives the
    power to regulate both interstate commerce and international commerce to
    the Congress. The Congress has delegated it a number of times for its own
    convenience. Sometimes when they've held the power, they've done really
    crazy things like Smoot-Hawley in the Tariff Act of 1930.


    Bill Reinsch: Exactly.


    Scott Miller: So, both the executive and the Congress have messed up from
    time to time about how to use this power but there's always been tension
    between the branches. It's why fast track or trade promotion authority is
    such a knockdown, drag out debate because it's all about delegation of
    authority. So, we're just playing this out as it has played out for 100
    years in American trade politics. I think, certainly I don't think there's
    a way to prove majority for the Toomey bill and the reciprocity bill that
    Duffy or Navarro bill is a nice piece of communication because it sounds
    fair that if country A has a 10% tariff on our product, we got to have a
    10% tariff on their products. That sounds good in basic communication. It's
    really bad as an economic principle because the more open your market is,
    the better it is for your own citizens and that gets lost in the notion of
    reciprocity.


    Scott Miller: So, I think that one's certainly dead on arrival with the
    Democratic Congress and it's unlikely that there's two-thirds of both
    Houses for the Toomey bill. So, I think at this point, we're just creating
    some trees to recycle later into paper [crosstalk 00:24:34].


    Bill Reinsch: There is a solution here, I have to say.


    Andrew Schwartz: Do tell.


    Bill Reinsch: Since neither Congress nor the administration is up to the
    task, they should let the Trade Guys make these decisions.


    Andrew Schwartz: Yes. This is the way to go.


    Bill Reinsch: You get much better policy that way.


    Andrew Schwartz: This is the way to go. Well, you heard it here and I hope
    the administration is hearing it here as well.


    Andrew Schwartz: Dear listeners, if you have a question for The Trade Guys,
    write us at tradeguys@csis.org. That's tradeguys@csis.org. We'll read some
    of your emails and have the Trade Guys react to it. We're also now on
    Spotify so you can find us there when you're listening to Rolling Stones or
    you're listening to Tom Petty or whatever you're listening to. Thank you
    Trade Guys.


    Scott Miller: Thanks Andrew.


    Andrew Schwartz: Thank you.


    Andrew Schwartz: You've been listening to the Trade Guys, a CSIS podcast.
      