
        China’s 21st Century Rise in Historical Perspective
      Tuesday, March 12, 2019 3:00 pm - 4:30 pmCSIS Headquarters 1st Floor  


Featuring
Klaus Mühlhahn
Professor of Chinese History and Culture
Free University of Berlin

With Commentary by

Stephen R. Platt
Professor of History
University of Massachusetts Amherst

and

Paul Heer
Former National Intelligence Officer for East Asia
U.S. National Intelligence Council

Many commentators claim that China's ongoing global rise refects a restoration of its earlier international prominence, while others highlight that China's emergence reflects distinctive characteristics of the country's current political leadership. In his new book, Making China Modern, Klaus Mühlhahn of the Free University of Berlin provides a panoramic survey of China's rise and resilience through war and rebellion, disease and famine. At this event Professor Mühlhahn will focus on the lessons from history that provide insight into China's evolving international position and how the United States and others should respond. Following his initial presentation, we will hear commentary from two eminent analysts of modern China: Stephen Platt of UMass Amherst, author of Imperial Twilight: The Opium War and the End of China's Last Golden Age (2018) and Autumn in the Heavenly Kingdom (2012); and Paul Heer, author of Mr. X and the Pacific: George F. Kennan and American Policy in East Asia (2018). 
This event is free, open to the public and will be streamed live from this website. Following the program, Professor Mühlhahn will be available to sign copies of his book. 

This event is made possible through general support to CSIS.      
              Featuring
        
    
          Klaus MühlhahnProfessor of Chinese History and Culture, Free University of BerlinStephen R. PlattProfessor of History, University of Massachusetts AmherstPaul HeerFormer National Intelligence Officer for East Asia, U.S. National Intelligence Council     
    
            
              CSIS Experts
        
    
          
  
  
  
  
  
  
      

      
      
      
      
  
      
      Twitter
    
  

    
  
  Scott Kennedy

      Senior Adviser, Freeman Chair in China Studies and Director, Project on Chinese Business and Political Economy
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

    
    
            