
        The Evening: Intel Push Back, Kurds, Make No Mistake and More
January 30, 2019Congratulatory Call
President Trump congratulated Venezuela’s opposition leader during a call on Wednesday to reinforce support for what the White House called the country’s “fight to regain its democracy,” as the WSJ’s Vivian Salama and Thomas Grove  report.
 Dive Deeper:  “Venezuela’s Suicide: Lessons From a Failed State,” by Carnegie’s Moises Naim and Francisco Toro.
 “No easy path for Venezuela’s Oil in the Struggle for a Transition in Power,” by CFR’s Amy Myers Jaffe.
Trump Pushes Back on Intel Chiefs
President Trump pushed back on Wednesday against his intelligence chiefs’ national security assessments, saying that “the Intelligence people seem to be extremely passive and naive when it comes to the dangers of Iran,” and defended his own, more positive appraisals of the threats North Korea and the Islamic State pose to the United States, as the NYT’s Eileen Sullivan  reports.
Reassuring the Kurds
President Trump on Monday night spoke with a Kurdish leader at the Trump International hotel in Washington where he expressed his fondness for the Kurds amid plans to pull U.S. troops out of Syria, as CNN’s Kylie Atwood  reports.
 Dive Deeper:  “Settling Kurdish Self-Determination in Northeast Syria,” by CSIS’s Will Todman.
Your Questions
Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.
 By The Numbers
Sign up to receive CSIS’s new Sunday morning newsletter By The Numbers. Each week, we’ll share with you some of the most compelling numbers, statistics, and data in our studies. Subscribe here. 
In That Number
70%
Feeling the pinch of U.S. sanctions, Iran's national currency has lost 70% of its value compared to the U.S. dollar.
 Source:  NYT 
Critical Quote
“Perhaps Intelligence should go back to school.”

— President Donald Trump
iDeas Lab
 Today, CSIS’s Beyond Parallel Program released new satellite imagery of the Sohae Satellite Launch Facility showing that despite promises from North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, no new dismantling activity has occurred since August 2018. Check out the latest analysis and images  here.
 The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.
Optics
 (Photo credit: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images). U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer (2nd R), Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross (R), Director of the National Economic Council Larry Kudlow and other Trump Administration officials sit down with Chinese Vice Premier Liu He (L), Central Bank Governor Yi Gang (2nd L) and other Chinese vice ministers and senior officials for negotiations in the Diplomatic Room at the Eisenhower Executive Office Building. The top trade officials are beginning two days of face-to-face trade talks to end a months-long trade war between the world’s two largest economies.
Recommended Reading
“Can China Turn the Middle of Nowhere Into the Center of the World Economy,” by the NYT’s Ben Mauk.
This Town Tomorrow
At  1:30 p.m., join CSIS for a panel discussion about the expectations and implications of the Trump administration's FY 2020 defense budget request.
 At  9:00 a.m., the Atlantic Council will host a panel discussion exploring the elements and challenges of Belarusian security and its implications for NATO and Russia.
 And, at  11:45 a.m., the Hudson Institute will hold a panel discussion on the collective punishment practices of the Iraqi government on citizens with alleged ties to the Islamic State.
Video
CSIS today hosted a conversation about what the 2015 Nigerian elections may tell us about the upcoming polls. The discussion was centered around Carl Levan’s new book,  Contemporary Nigerian Politics: Competition in a Time of Transition and Terror. Watch the full event  here.
Podcasts
 Overdosing on opioid is the leading cause of accidental death in the United States, surpassing car accidents. Take As Directed host Steve Morrison dives into its origins of the crisis in the first episode of a special miniseries on the American opioid epidemic.
 Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.
Smiles
I’m glad you all like the Keith Richards/Mick Jagger smiles this week. I’ll keep them coming. One of the many cool things about Keith is that he founded not one, but two extraordinary bands—The Rolling Stones and The X-Pensive Winos.
 The Winos are one of my all-time favorite bands—whether it’s Ivan Neville on keyboards, Waddy Wachtel on guitar, Steve Jordan on drums or Sarah Dash on vocals, the Winos just destroy me. Like this deep cut, “Make No Mistake.”
      