
        The Evening: Venezuela Sanctions, Taliban Peace Framework, Keith Richards and More
January 28, 2019Sanctions Against Venezuela's State Oil
The U.S. imposed sanctions against Venezuela’s state-oil giant Petróleos de Venezuela S.A. today in an effort to cripple President Nicolás Maduro’s government and empower an opposition leader, as the WSJ’s Ian Talley and Michael Bender  report.
 Dive Deeper : “Venezuela: The Rise and Fall of a Petrostate,” by CFR’s Rocio Cara Labrador.
 Tomorrow, join CSIS (in person or online) for a  conversation with Dr. Gustavo Tarre, the designated Venezuelan permanent representative to the OAS, appointed by the interim president of Venezuela, Juan Guaidó.
Agreement in Principle to Peace Framework in Afghanistan
American and Taliban officials have agreed in principle to the framework of a deal in which the insurgents would guarantee Afghan territory is never used by terrorists, which could lead to a full pullout of American troops in return for larger concessions from the Taliban, as the NYT’s Mujib Mashal  reports.
 Dive Deeper : “Transcript: The U.S. Withdraws: Syria and Afghanistan,” a Schieffer Series event at CSIS, January 25th.
 “Afghanistan as Vietnam Redux: Bomb, Declare Peace, and Leave?” by CSIS’s Anthony Cordesman.
Expected Trade Talks Progress
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said today the United States expects to make significant progress this week in trade talks with Chinese Vice Premier Liu He, as Reuters  reports  .
 Dive Deeper : “Building a Better Deal with China,” by CSIS’s Daniel Rosen and Scott Kennedy.
Your Questions
Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org  . We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.
By The Numbers  
Sign up to receive CSIS’s new Sunday morning newsletter By The Numbers. Each week, we’ll share with you some of the most compelling numbers, statistics, and data in our studies.  Subscribe here. 
In That Number
$3 Billion
The partial government shutdown that ended Friday will cost the government about $3 billion and will subtract about 0.4 percentage point from annualized gross domestic product growth in the first quarter, according to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office (CBO).
 Source:  CBO 
Critical Quote
“The Taliban have committed, to our satisfaction, to do what is necessary that would prevent Afghanistan from ever becoming a platform for international terrorist groups or individuals.”

— Zalmay Khalilzad, U.S. special representative for Afghanistan reconciliation
iDeas Lab
 CSIS's Project on Prosperity and Development released a video focusing on global forced migration, one of today's most significant challenges. "A New Generation of Forced Migration" emphasizes that the U.S. and its allies must reevaluate their strategies to confront this humanitarian crisis.
 The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.
Optics
 (Photo credit: Adalberto Roque/AFP/Getty Images). A resident of tornado-hit Regla neighbourhood in front of her destroyed house today in Havana.
Recommended Reading
“Davos 2019: No more heroes for the global elite,” by the FT’s Gideon Rachmanfter.
This Town Tomorrow
At  10:00 a.m., join CSIS for a discussion exploring how the U.S. government and industry can work together in developing software for national security capabilities.
 Later, at  12:30 p.m., return to CSIS for a public conversation with Gustavo Tarre, the Venezuelan special representative to the OAS, appointed last week by the interim president of Venezuela, Juan Guaidó.
 And, at  8:45 a.m., the Peterson Institute for International Economics will hold a discussion with Giovanni Tria, minister of economy and finance of Italy, about the Italian and European economic outlook and policy changes.
Video
U.S. and Taliban officials have developed the framework for a peace deal, taking the first step toward ending the 17-year war in Afghanistan. CSIS Senior Adviser Mark Cancian explains how the United States has found the money to fight its wars post-9/11. Watch the full video  here.
Podcasts
 35 West examines the politics and policies of the 35 countries in the Western Hemisphere. It especially focuses on U.S. engagement with the region, whether on trade, diplomacy, or security issues like drugs and terrorism. The newest episode, Coming Home, explores why many Mexican and Central American migrants are returning home, whether they want to or not.
 Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.
Smiles
If you read this space you know that I’ve been obsessing over the 20th anniversary of The Sopranos. I just re-watched Season 2. The final episode of that season features a fairly obscure Rolling Stones tune, “Thru and Thru,” off the 1994 album “Voodoo Lounge.”
 “Thru and Thru” is kind of a masterpiece—especially if you love Keith Richards.
      