
        PONI 2019 Capstone Conference
      Tuesday, April 30, 2019 9:00 am - 8:15 pmU.S Strategic Command, Offutt Air Force BaseAdd to CalendariCalendar
Outlook
Google
Yahoo
  Registration
 


Important notes:


	This event will take place offsite at U.S. Strategic Command, Offut Air Force Base, Nebraska at the Doughtery Conference Center on Tuesday, April 30th at 9:00 a.m. (CST)
	Due to base access, all attendees (U.S. citizens and foreign nationals) must complete the registration form. The PONI team will notify you if there are any issues with your access. 


Please contact Simone Williams at swilliams@csis.org with any questions.

This event is the final conference in the 2018-2019 PONI Conference Series. The conference will feature presentations from emerging nuclear experts covering topics such as nuclear policy and strategies, arms control and proliferation challenges, technology and capabilities, and deterrence.

The PONI Conference Series, is unique in its emphasis on featuring rising experts and young professionals in the nuclear field. The Conference Series draws emerging thought leaders from across the nuclear enterprise and policy community and provides them with a visible platform for sharing their new thinking on a range of nuclear issues.

We have a hotel block at the the Courtyard by Marriot Omaha Bellevue at Beardmore, 3730 Raynor Pkwy, Bellevue, NE 68123. If you would like to stay at the same hotel as the PONI team you can contact the hotel for individuall reservations at 402-408-5300 or click here.

All comments made at the conference are off-the-record


Conference Agenda*

*Please note this is not final and some items are subject to change

8:30     Conference Check-in and Breakfast
 
9:15     Conference Welcome

      Rebecca Hersman, Director, Project on Nuclear Issues and Senior Adviser,  International Security Program, Center for Strategic and International Studies

 9:30      Panel 1: Arms control and Disarmament
              Panel Moderator: TBA

       Rethinking Arms Control: Shifting Focus from Strategic to Non-Strategic Challenge
       Bryn Woollacott (invited)

Proliferation Revisited: The Role of Sectoral Elites in Domestic Nuclear Weapons Programs
Kate Hewitt
 
Preparing for the Unthinkable in East Asia: Evaluating Cross-National Public Opinion on the U.S. Nuclear Umbrella
David Allison & Stephen Herzog

11:00     BREAK

11:15     Panel: Nuclear Challenges & Risks

Panel Moderator: TBA

Nuclear Superiority in the Cuban Missile Crisis
Yashar Parsie

The Impacts of Changes to US Nuclear Declaratory Policy for European Allies
Maxwell Dowman
 
ISIS: The Emergent Nuclear Threat in Southeastern Europe
Paige Grasser

Nonproliferation: A (Limited) Russian Interest
Cameron Trainer

12:45   Lunch

3:00     Panel 4: Technology, Capabilities, & Acquisitions
            Panel Moderator: TBA

    The US Sale of Trident to the UK in 1977-1982
    Suzanne Doyle
 
    Anti-satellite technology and US-China Nuclear Deterrence Stability
    Cameron Hunter
 
    Cyber Threats to Nuclear Command, Control, and Communications
    Kayla Matteucci
 
    Danger Zone? Strategic Implications of Non-Kinetic Disruption of Nuclear Command and Control
    Brian Radzinsky

4:30  End of Presentation Panels   

5:30  Reception at Courtyard Marriot Bellevue, 3730 Raynor Parkway
 
6:30  Dinner & Keynote by General John Hyten, Commander of U.S> Strategic Command
 
8:15  End of Conference

This event is made possible by support from Defense Threat Reduction Agency, Department of Defense, Air Force Global Strike Command, and Northrop Grumman.
      
              CSIS Experts
        
    
          
  
  
  
  
  
  
      

      
      
      
      
  
      
      Twitter
    
  

    
  
  Rebecca Hersman

      Director, Project on Nuclear Issues, and Senior Adviser, International Security Program
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

    
    
            