
        Former Congresswoman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen Talks Trade
January 24, 2019
    Scott Miller: I'm Scott.


    Bill Reinsch: I'm Bill.


    Scott & Bill: And we're the Trade Guys.


    Andrew Schwartz: You're listening to the Trade Guys, a podcast produced by
    CSIS where we talk about trade in terms that everyone can understand. I'm
    H. Andrew Schwartz, and I'm here with Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch, the
    CSIS Trade Guys. On this very special episode of the Trade Guys, I left the
    Trade Guys at home because I wanted to interview Representative Ileana
    Ros-Lehtinen. She's a republican from Florida, and she shared the House
    Foreign Relations Committee from 2011 to 2013. She will have retired when
    you hear this, but this is a really terrific interview, and, as you'll
    hear, she's got a lot of really thoughtful and interesting ideas on trade
    and about how the politics of trade are changing, all on this episode of
    the Trade Guys.


    Andrew Schwartz: Miami is like my favorite place, second home away from
    home.


    Ileana
    Ros-Lehtinen: Hey, I like that, and if that's true, then you've been all
    over my district 'cause I've got Miami Beach, Coral Gables, Key Biscayne,
    Little Havana.


    Andrew Schwartz: Yeah.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Oh my gosh.


    Andrew Schwartz: Yeah. Yeah.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: [crosstalk 00:01:17]


    Andrew Schwartz: Alright. So I wanted to ask you, how has your stance on
    trade policy evolved over time from being a 'no' on NAFTA and the WTO to a
    'yes' on a slew of different trade agreements later in your career?


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Well, you are so right. Thank you for, first of all,
    thank you for this opportunity, but you're so right. I opposed NAFTA in '93
    because Mexico at that time did not have the best leadership, and Mexico
    was heavily involved with trading with Cuba. I opposed establishing the
    WTO. Then the next year in '94, but I voted against withdrawing in 2000
    because, well, I saw that changes were possible. And at that point I
    thought, we were gonna be able to make the changes that we want.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: I opposed granting China normal trade relations in
    2000, that same year, and why? Because of the human rights abuses, because
    the rule of law concerns, and in fact, twice as many Republicans voted in
    favor as Democrats. But I opposed it because of China's record, and I think
    that's why you've got to make that kind of distinction. Who are we trading
    with? I supported trade agreements with Columbia, a good ally, South Korea.


    Andrew Schwartz: Sure.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Panama, CAFTA-DR, which was a Dominican Republic and
    Central American countries with Bahrain, with Singapore, with Chile, but
    unlike China and Russia because those were despotic countries. But I am in
    favor of free trade agreements with free and fair and allied countries. So
    I opposed granting then later, Russia, normal trade relations. It would
    have repealed Jackson–Vanik, but I voted yes on the bill. Why? You know, in
    legislation, you've got to look at the totality of the bill. This was our
    vehicle to get the Magnitsky Act, and the Magnitsky Act has been the
    premier bill and law that we have used to sanction human rights violators.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: So in order to get to the good stuff, you have to
    swallow some of the bad stuff, but what we've seen is that ... My
    philosophy is, we've got to choose our trading partners carefully.


    Andrew Schwartz: Right.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Some regimes don't have any interests in complying
    with standards on human rights, don't have any interest in complying with
    the rule of law, and they're not going to change no matter how much we
    trade with them. We have this romantic notion that if we trade with them,
    they will be more Democratic. We have seen that that is not the case.
    Clinton made the argument that trade with China was about national
    security, and that was really a mistaken belief that economic openings and
    free market reform, all of this, would lead to democracy, would lead to
    respect for the rule of law, would lead to a full array of political rights
    for the Chinese people, human rights for the Chinese people. And Obama,
    President Obama made the same misguided argument about Cuba, and what have
    we seen after opening up to Cuba supposedly?


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Well, that regime is more repressive than ever, no
    matter how much window dressing and propaganda they push, and what we've
    seen are traditionally the Democratic party was the party that argued
    against free trade agreements, usually because of human rights or labor
    concerns in the partnered countries. Well, the concerns that American jobs
    would move overseas. So we've seen kind of a shift in trade policy and the
    feelings and the underpinnings of trade policy because we saw what
    happened, globalization, globalism, multilateralism. They've become dirty
    words in recent years. Why? Because politicians underestimated the negative
    impact of trade deals, especially with China joining the WTO. The negative
    impact on American jobs and industries and overestimated how much trade
    could help spread liberal ideas. And now we see, what's interesting is that
    President Trump, a Republican president, now embodies this movement.


    Andrew Schwartz: You've really hit on something here, Congresswoman. You've
    been in the House for over 30 years. You've been Chairwoman of the House,
    Foreign Relations Committee-


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Longer than you've been alive, I believe.


    Andrew Schwartz: No, not quite. I'm a little older than that.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Almost.


    Andrew Schwartz: You've seen a lot, and you've seen support shift on trade
    over time. Democrats had been anti trade, became pro trade. Why the shift?


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Well, I think that we have been seeing as abdicating
    U.S. Sovereignty because of these trade deals. People have looked at what
    has happened in our economy and they said, "Well, why not America first?
    What about manufacturing all of our goods have been made somewhere else."
    The strength that globalism and multilateralism and all these multilateral
    organizations, especially with China joining the WTO, has not produced a
    refill income enhancer for the American public. They look at their
    paycheck, and what they've seen is, China is favoring its own industry's.
    They're discriminating against U.S. company's. They're involved in currency
    manipulation and illegal subsidies, even though China's a member of the
    WTO, and the WTO rules say hey, this isn't allowed. You can't favor your
    own companies. You can't do subsidies.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: So I always say that the problem isn't free trade. The
    problem is the countries with which we're making deals, and that the deals
    aren't being enforced. Countries like China don't play by the rules. We
    need to be more strategic in our approach, and that's been the real focus.


    Andrew Schwartz: What do you think of the politics of trade in the Congress
    right now?


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Well, it's been quite a change, and all of it, I know
    I keep saying China joining the WTO, but that really brought it home to
    people. President Trump has got a good pulse on the American public, and
    they're thinking, you know, how is this trade benefited me? Has it
    benefited my family? And look, I'm not in favor of Trump's tariffs, and I'm
    not in favor of these trade wars. But what we need to do is vigorously
    enforce the deals on the books, bring cases to the WTO, challenge China,
    impose penalties on China for the subsidies and favoring its own companies,
    and expand trade opportunities with countries that play by the rules and
    see the world in the same way that we do.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: We've got a lot of allied countries. We should favor
    them. We've got to look at it through a lens of human rights, human
    liberty, and that would be a way of undercutting China and its predatory
    practices and build a system that's based on trust, that's built on
    freedom, that's built on fairness. And that's what the American people see.
    They see that these trade deals has not helped them at all. In fact, they
    see jobs going overseas, and I think that we, in the Congress,
    underestimated that negative impact on trade deals. And until we get this
    right, until we see, my gosh, are these trade deals hurting American jobs,
    are they hurting American industries? I think that we're gonna keep getting
    it wrong, and I think that President Trump's trade policies will be gaining
    favor because people are saying, "Hey, I'm not benefited for this."


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: So we should deal and help partner countries. We
    should punish countries that aren't playing by the rules.


    Andrew Schwartz: Do you think this is something that Republicans and
    Democrats can work on together in the next Congress and with this
    president?


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Absolutely. I'm very optimistic, even though I will
    not be here. I think that more Republicans and Democrats can work on why
    free trade is good. Free trade agreements allow U.S. Exports to enter
    countries with fewer barriers. It gives American businesses a much needed
    boost in revenues, and I think that we need to have the American public
    understand this, that there's a fundamental misconception regarding free
    trade agreements because the U.S. economy is a very open one. And free
    trade agreements are primarily about removing the barriers in other
    countries to U.S. exports.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: So people don't really get that. Not because that
    they're silly or stupid. No, no, no. We have not done our job of saying,
    you know, when we talk about free trade, it's to help American businesses
    so that our product can go to other countries and without having these
    punishing tariffs and fees. Small businesses will be able to export more.
    Foreign trade barriers have got to come down, and that can only happen if
    we get more trade agreements that will help level the playing field. And I
    know that's a cliché, and people are always talking about leveling the
    playing field. But that's so true. The U.S. Doesn't have that level playing
    field, and we've gotta get rid of barriers.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: So in that case, you can make the argument Democrats
    and Republicans together, that free trade is good for the American economy,
    but on the other hand, free trade can be bad. Why? Look, well you've got
    countries like China undermining U.S. Businesses abroad, putting our
    companies at a severe disadvantage. And what happens? That results in lost
    sales and jobs. So we've gotta choose our trade partners in the right way.
    If regimes don't have any interests in human rights or the rule of law, why
    do we think that by trading with them, we're gonna make them into
    democracies? I think that the American public sees through that, and they
    say, "No. This is not a good deal for me." And I'm going to be opposed.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: So it's kind of shifted where the Republicans were
    always the free traders in a generalized way, and whenever you generalize
    of course, there are always exceptions. But the Democrats would always put
    barriers saying, "No. We've gotta have fair trade, and they've gotta
    support worker's rights, et cetera." And I think the American people are
    more inclined to be opposing trade deals because they support U.S. Workers,
    and they see the U.S. Workers are being hurt because of these trade deals,
    because we're not making reforms in efficiency and flexibility or
    oversight.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: So let's choose our trade partners carefully. Let's
    not think that trading with them is going to make them democracies. It
    hasn't worked in Russia or China or any other places, and instead, get the
    best deal that we can. Remove the barriers so that American businesses have
    that level playing field.


    Andrew Schwartz: Congresswoman, I know you have a vote coming up. So we're
    gonna let you go, but cannot thank you enough. Bless you for your service
    for all these years in the United States Congress. You'll be missed on
    Capitol Hill, but I know you'll still be around and your thoughts and your
    presence will still be with us. Thank you so much for joining us.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Well, and I'm looking forward to— we wanna do
    everything we can to promote American businesses and get good deals with
    partnered countries, not with our enemy.


    Andrew Schwartz: You got it. We'll talk to you soon.


    Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Alright. Gracias, amigo.


    Andrew Schwartz: To our listeners, if you have a question for the Trade
    Guys, write us at TradeGuys@CSIS.org. That's TradeGuys@CSIS.org. We'll read
    some of your emails and have the Trade Guys react to it. We're also now on
    Spotify. So you can find us there when you're listening to Rolling Stones,
    or you're listening to Tom Petty, or whatever you're listening. Thank you
    Trade Guys.


    Scott & Bill: Thank you.


    Andrew Schwartz: You've been listening to the Trade Guys, a CSIS podcast.
      