
        Salvaging the World Trade Organization
January 22, 2019
    Two weeks ago, I discussed the challenges facing the Trump administration
    in 2019 and last week focused on the challenges facing the Congress.
    Completing the series, this week will look at the World Trade Organization
    (WTO). For the readers of this column who are trade wonks, there is no need
    to explain what the WTO is or what it does. For the rest of you, let's just
    say it plays an outsized role in the global trading system, and, as my
    colleague Scott Miller says, "You'll miss it when it's gone."


    It is important because it is the venue for multilateral trade negotiations
    that can promote global growth and job creation. Since progress on that
    front is largely stalled right now, its other function—dispute
    resolution—has drawn more attention. It is the only multilateral
    institution that has a fully developed dispute resolution system, one that
    not only adjudicates disputes but can make its decisions stick. It uses a
    two-part process—panels of experts that initially rule on disputes and an
    Appellate Body that considers appeals of panel decisions. Because panel
    decisions (if not appealed) and Appellate Body decisions can only be
    blocked by consensus, the system has considerable clout.


    While the panels have operated without much controversy, the Appellate Body
    has become the target of attacks, primarily from the United States. Without
    going into mind-numbing detail, there are two categories of criticism.
    First, the Appellate Body has either not adhered to its own rules, such as
    the time limit for producing a report, or has taken procedural decisions
    that properly belong to the full Dispute Settlement Body, such as deciding
    that members whose terms have expired can continue to work on pending
    cases. Second, the Appellate Body is guilty of judicial overreach—its
    decisions interpret WTO rules in ways that go beyond what the members
    negotiated in the Uruguay Round.


    The United States is not the only country that has these concerns,
    particularly those in the first category, but it has precipitated a crisis
    by blocking the appointment of new Appellate Body members as the old ones'
    terms expire. This began in the Obama administration, but it has reached a
    more serious stage in the Trump administration as vacancies have mounted
    up. Currently, only three of the seven positions are filled, with two more
    terms due to expire next December. At that point, the Appellate Body will
    not be able to function since the rules require three members to consider
    an appeal. Since the United States is a major player in the dispute
    resolution process, both as plaintiff and defendant, its demise would be a
    major blow. If we win at the panel stage, and the other party appeals, the
    outcome remains unresolved because there is no one to adjudicate the case.
    Conversely, if we lose, we have no place to go. One can argue that in that
    situation we would not have to comply, but neither would the other
    countries in cases where we win. Since we win most of the cases we bring,
    we have a lot to lose if the system collapses.


    This looming crisis has prompted other nations to consider a way out of the
    impasse. Canada is leading a group that has developed a paper, and the
    European Union has produced its own paper. In addition, the United States,
    Japan, and the European Union are developing proposed rules changes
    intended to deal with the challenges China poses for the trading system
    because many of the Appellate Body's alleged failures deal with Chinese
    cases.


    However, the one thing you can always say about the WTO is that it's slow.
    It would be highly unusual for an agreement to be reached on any of these
    before the Appellate Body implodes. Because of that, countries are thinking
    about a plan B. One of the more interesting ones is to use Article 25 of
    the Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU), which allows for "expeditious
    arbitration within the WTO as an alternative means of dispute settlement .
    . . of certain disputes that concern issues that are clearly defined by
    both parties . . . which shall agree on procedures to be followed." This
    was probably intended to be employed on a case by case basis when
    contending parties agree to use it, but in theory WTO members, absent the
    United States, could agree to use it in all appeal cases except those
    involving the United States and establish procedures that look a lot like
    those of the Appellate Body. That would largely solve the problem for
    everybody else but leave the United States on the sidelines unable to
    defend its victories or appeal its losses.


    A Machiavellian explanation for the U.S. strategy is that the demise of the
    Appellate Body would allow us to avoid the consequences of two big cases we
    may lose—over the steel tariffs and our continued treatment of China as a
    nonmarket economy—but decisions on those are some distance away, while more
    immediate cases include some against China we are likely to win. If we
    cannot nail down those victories through a functioning appeals process, we
    significantly undercut our larger China strategy and our ability to portray
    China as the world's biggest violator of the rules.


    Underlying these short-term considerations are the systemic implications.
    The United States designed the current system beginning at Bretton Woods
    and has supported it ever since. If we undermine it, we give others an
    excuse to do the same, and we revert to the law of the jungle, which we saw
    most recently in the 1920s and 1930s. The president may think that would
    give him more leverage, but as he should be learning from China, the
    European Union, and Japan, leveraging sovereign countries is a lot harder
    than leveraging other real estate developers.


    
        William Reinsch holds the Scholl Chair in International Business at the
        Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C.
    

Subscribe to William Reinsch's Weekly Column

    Commentary
    
        is produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies
        (CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution focusing on international
        public policy issues. Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary.
        CSIS does not take specific policy positions. Accordingly, all views,
        positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be
        understood to be solely those of the author(s).
    


    
        © 2019 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All
        rights reserved.
    
      