
        The Evening: Pompeo in Iraq, Ocean Security, Roy’s Bluz and More
January 9, 2019Good Evening,

It's Wednesday, January 9th.

Pompeo Visits Iraq

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo made an unannounced visit to Iraq today, meeting with the Iraqi prime minister, Kurdish officials and other government leaders in a bid to demonstrate the United States’ support for a key ally, as the Washington Post ’s Tamer El-Ghobashy  reports.

And as Reuters  reports, the U.S. troop withdrawal from Syria will proceed despite Turkish threats against the Kurds.

Dive Deeper: “Iraq, Iran, the Gulf, Turkey, and the Future: The Meaningless Debate over the Trump Strategy in Syria,” by CSIS’s Anthony Cordesman.

“Eight Days in Middle East Puts Pompeo’s Diplomacy to the Test,” by the Washington Institute’s Simon Henderson.

Stephenson Ocean Security Project Launched

CSIS today launched our new Stephenson Ocean Security Project (SOS), which focuses on the links between ocean health and global security. A  live event  featured keynote remarks by Senator Sheldon Whitehouse (D-RI), and our new interactive micro-website is now available  here.

Dive Deeper: “Illuminating the South China Sea’s Dark Fishing Fleets,” by CSIS’s Greg Poling.

Trade Hurdles

The U.S. and China wrapped up their first face-to-face trade negotiations since a temporary tariff truce was declared last month, making progress toward an agreement but leaving the thorniest issues to be resolved in higher-level talks, as the WSJ’s Lingling Wei  reports.

Dive Deeper: “The Future of the Global Economy: Integration or Fragmentation?” by Peterson Institute for International Economics's Adam Posen.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


CSIS’s Trade Guys  Crash Course

Now enrolling for CSIS Crash Course, a one-day seminar on the fundamentals of U.S. international trade policy and politics for trade professionals. This program will be conducted by CSIS experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch, known as the Trade Guys from their highly-rated weekly podcast. Information  here.

 

In That Number

47%

Across 26 countries, 47% of those surveyed say their country is well prepared to handle a major cyber attack.

Source:  Pew Research Center 

Critical Quote


“Just left a meeting with Chuck and Nancy, a total waste of time.”


— President Donald Trump

iDeas Lab


CSIS today launched the The Stephenson Ocean Security (SOS) Project, a new initiative that highlights security challenges that arise from marine resource competition and promotes solutions that support sustainable development, coalition building, and the need for American leadership. Visit the  SOS Project website  to learn more about the intersection of ocean health and global security.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Win McNamee/Getty Images). President Trump and Vice President Pence today at the U.S. Capitol.

Recommended Reading

“Illuminating the South China Sea’s Dark Fishing Fleets,” by CSIS’s Greg Poling.

This Town Tomorrow

At  10:00 a.m., join CSIS for a discussion on the challenges and opportunities of future fleet manning and training from the senior enlisted perspective.

Later, at  2:00 p.m., the Atlantic Council will host a discussion on global trade trends, challenges, and opportunities in 2019 with European Commissioner for Trade Cecilia Malmström.

And, at  3:30 p.m., the Woodrow Wilson Center will hold a discussion on how policymakers, health practitioners, educators, and advocates can achieve sexual and reproductive health and rights for all.

Video

The SOS Project explores how resource competition and climate change threaten the future of our oceans. To learn more about how marine resource disputes drive instability in key regions of the globe and the ways that climate change is exacerbating this challenge, watch the SOS Project's introductory video  here.

Podcasts


Trade experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch break down the buzz around trade, how it affects policy, and how it impacts your day-to-day. The Trade Guys is hosted every week by H. Andrew Schwartz.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

One more from the great Roy Buchanan, “Roy’s Bluz.” One of the coolest things about this clip is watching the audience reaction to Buchanan. They are completely astonished by this now legendary performance.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      