
        Fly Me to the Moon
January 3, 2019
    Is it a space race if only one side is running? China has an ambitious
    space program with both military and civil components, and the primary goal
    of its civil program is political to demonstrate China’s great power status
    to its citizens, its neighbors, and to the United States.


    Let’s handicap the participants. In unmanned spaceflight and robotic
    planetary exploration, no other country can match the National Aeronautics
    and Space Administration’s (NASA) New Horizons spacecraft did a flyby of
    Ultima Thule, a tiny planetoid that is four billion miles from earth, and
    this was after a flyby of Pluto. Two NASA spacecrafts have left the solar
    system to enter interplanetary space, the only man-made objects to have
    done so. NASA operates multiple robot explorers on Mars. These are
    unparalleled achievements, and while landing a robot on the dark side of
    the moon is impressive, it does not compare. Europe has a smaller number of
    unmanned exploration programs, as do China, India, and Russia, but the bulk
    of activity and data comes from U.S. missions.


    A military comparison is more complex, in part because much of the
    comparison is classified. The United States is far more reliant than China
    on space for military advantage; armed conflict with China would see
    Chinese efforts to disrupt, damage, or destroy U.S. military spacecraft and
    the United States could retaliate in kind. The United States still has
    advantages, but with China and other hostile nations building
    anti-satellite capabilities, the risk to this advantage is greater than
    many would like. Renaming and reorganizing U.S. military space efforts will
    not change this.


    U.S. earth observation programs are robust, despite occasional political
    aversion to climate science, but planetary monitoring (for weather and
    climate change and natural disasters) is something best seen as done in
    partnership with the European Space Agency, Japan, and other European space
    nations. Many nations now have earth remote sensing platforms with varying
    capabilities. Whoever provides Americans with news about the weather, they
    are channeling for NASA and the National Oceans and Atmospheric Agency’s
    (NOAA) remote sensing satellite programs, and these earth science space
    programs are not really a competition, but the U.S. program remains one of
    the most sophisticated in the world.


    If there is a dark spot on this picture, it is in human spaceflight. China
    can put people in space, as can Russia, but the United States cannot. In
    fact, the landing on the moon should be seen as another step toward China’s
    goal of landing humans on the Moon. The Colombia disaster made NASA
    risk-averse, slowing the development of manned programs to a crawl. The
    previous administration’s decision to rely on commercial space programs for
    human flight has not yet born fruit, and these efforts so far have repeated
    what U.S. space programs did in the 1950s. The promised flight to Mars was
    always a fantasy. Right now, China has the most promising human spaceflight
    program.


    Despite various promises to rebuild Russia’s space program, it is in a slow
    decline. Russia successfully restored its Global Navigation Satellite
    System (GLONASS) navigation system a few years ago, but few new initiatives
    have gone much past the public announcement phase. A few other nations have
    space programs, but they are unremarkable.


    This assessment discounts the International Space Station. It is impressive
    for NASA and its partners to have maintained a continuous presence in space
    (albeit in low earth orbit, roughly 250 miles above the surface and with
    dependence on Russian spacecraft for crewing), but the space station has
    become a sort of exploratory backwater. China would like to have its own
    space station but has been unable to sustain a continuous presence. Russia
    has said it separates its section of the International Space Station to
    form the core of a new entirely Russian space station, but this has not
    gone much beyond the planning phase.


    In three out of four areas of space activity, the United States maintains
    an advantage in any “race.” It is only in manned flight, with its political
    symbolism, that China is a competitor and may surpass us. As with so many
    areas of competition between China and the United States, it is not that
    China is speeding up but that the United States is slowing down, hobbled by
    its fractious politics (China has not had a government shutdown in
    decades). China’s leaders see space programs as a way to speed recognition
    of China as a great power equal (and perhaps superior) to the United
    States. U.S. space technology is superior, our robotic programs are
    unmatched, but our civil space programs are disconnected from national
    politics and a strategic framework. Perhaps this will change when China
    lands explorers on the moon. A manned presence on the moon is an achievable
    goal for the United States and, soon, for China. But if it is a race, and
    if nothing changes, we can predict who will get to the Moon’s surface
    first.


    
        James Andrew Lewis is a senior vice president at the Center for
        Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C.
    


    Commentary
    
        is produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies
        (CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution focusing on international
        public policy issues. Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary.
        CSIS does not take specific policy positions. Accordingly, all views,
        positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be
        understood to be solely those of the author(s).
    


    
        © 2019 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All
        rights reserved.
    
      