
        Josh Bolten Joins the Trade Guys (Part I)
January 10, 2019
    SCOTT MILLER: I’m Scott.


    WILLIAM ALAN REINSCH: I’m Bill.


    MR. MILLER and MR. REINSCH: (Together.) And we’re The Trade Guys.


    (Music plays.)


    H. ANDREW SCHWARTZ: You’re listening to The Trade Guys, a podcast produced
    by CSIS, where we talk about trade in terms that everyone can understand.
    I’m H. Andrew Schwartz. And I’m here with Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch,
    the CSIS Trade Guys.


    In this first episode of 2019, we kick off the new year by welcoming a very
    special guest. Josh Bolten is the president and CEO of the Business
    Roundtable, which represents the CEOs of America’s leading companies.
    Previously, Josh Bolten served in the White House under President George W.
    Bush as his chief of staff. He also served as director of the OMB, Office
    of Management and Budget. Before that, he served as general counsel to the
    United States Trade Representative and as chief trade counsel to the Senate
    Finance Committee.


    We’re going to talk with Josh Bolten about the USMCA, the new NAFTA. We’ll
    talk about China and we’ll talk about the politics of trade. All that right
    here on this episode of The Trade Guys.


    We have with us today an extremely distinguished guest, Mr. Josh Bolten,
    who’s the president and CEO of the Business Roundtable.


    Josh, welcome to The Trade Guys. Thanks for being with us.


    JOSH BOLTEN: Thanks for having me.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: So tell us, just what is the Business Roundtable? What does
    it do?


    MR. BOLTEN: The Business Roundtable is an organization of around 200 CEOs
    of America’s largest corporations. Collectively, they employ over 15
    million people. They have revenues of around $8 trillion.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Eight trillion (dollars).


    MR. BOLTEN: Eight trillion dollars is the annual revenues of our –


    MR. REINSCH: That’s real money.


    MR. BOLTEN: – collective membership. And they constitute well over a
    quarter of the market capitalization of the U.S. stock market. So these are
    heavy hitters in the U.S. economy. And the Business Roundtable is an
    especially effective organization because the members of our group are the
    CEOs themselves and we ask them, when they participate in the roundtable,
    to put aside their parochial interests and focus on the interests of the
    overall U.S. economy.


    So it’s an organization that advocates on behalf of a strong and growing
    U.S. economy overall. And it’s – and it’s made up of big players in
    essentially every industry in the United States.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: For you, you’ve dealt with the heaviest hitters in the world,
    including your former boss, the president of the United States, the 43rd
    president of the United States, George W. Bush. So when you get with the
    members of the Business Roundtable, the heaviest hitters there are in
    business, is it – is it hard to keep them on message? I mean, you’ve kept
    the president of the United States on message, you’ve kept the meetings
    going, you’ve kept the trains running. What’s it like in this environment?
    I mean, this is a – this is a heavy hitter and a tough environment I
    imagine.


    MR. BOLTEN: You know, it’s easier than I expected.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Really?


    MR. BOLTEN: Because, I mean, I’m accustomed to serving one boss and I
    thought it would be difficult to have 200 bosses.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Herding CEOs.


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah, who are notoriously independent and self-confident, which
    every one of the 200 CEOs of the roundtable is. But my experience is that
    when they come together on the big economic issues of the day, they really
    do put aside their parochial interests and they tend in most cases to come
    out in roughly the same place substantively. And even if they don’t come
    out in the same place substantively, they recognize the value of
    cooperating with each other, especially in days like the ones we’re living
    through now where really many of the fundamental principles of our economic
    system are either under assault or in question.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Right. And so let’s talk about that. We have The Trade Guys
    here, Bill Reinsch, Scott Miller, who have – on our show, we talk about the
    constant battles within the administration, the administration is having
    with Congress, the administration is having with members of its own party
    even, and certainly with both of our – both our allies and our adversaries.
    So how are you fitting into the trade picture right now at the Business
    Roundtable? It’s got to be, you know, a pretty thin line to walk.


    MR. BOLTEN: Well, we crossed the line some time ago. Let me step back for a
    moment and say that when I joined the roundtable at the outset of the Trump
    administration, I expected a group that would be regularly in tension with
    the Trump administration, in part because I discovered that practically
    none of the CEOs in the Business Roundtable had supported, vocally and
    actively supported, Trump for president. So I expected a tense
    relationship.


    What I found instead was a lot of enthusiasm and a very close working
    relationship with the Trump administration because the Trump administration
    was promising and in many cases delivered on important economic reforms
    that many of our CEOs viewed as essential to the success of the U.S.
    economy, beginning with corporate tax reform on which the Congress and the
    Trump administration delivered and whose promise I believe is being
    realized in the relatively strong U.S. economy we’ve had for the last year
    and I believe are likely to have going forward.


    So with that as background, I say on most issues over the course of the
    past two years of the Trump administration, the CEOs of the Business
    Roundtable have been largely supportive and mostly pleased with tax policy,
    with regulatory policy, with workforce policy, which is very important to
    all of them right now.


    The notable exception – and I say it now because I’m in the presence of The
    Trade Guys –


    MR. SCHWARTZ: The Trade Guys are heating up over here, I can –


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: It’s like they’re on warmup, you know? They’re idling.


    MR. REINSCH: Smoke is not yet coming out of ears, though. (Laughter.)


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah. But I’m with the leading brains of the trade
    intelligentsia in Washington and so –


    MR. SCHWARTZ: That’s a great endorsement, by the way.


    MR. MILLER: Well, we’re just over on the sidelines riding that stationery
    bike waiting for the coach to put us in.


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah. Well, I’m going to – I’m going to put you in now by
    saying that the notable exception where our CEOs have been in stark
    disagreement with the Trump administration, not on everything, but on most
    things, has been on trade policy.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Yeah.


    MR. BOLTEN: Which has created a very strong headwind that is at least
    partially counteracting strong tailwinds that they’re experiencing as a
    result of Trump administration tax and regulatory policy.


    MR. MILLER: And the BRT is a longstanding free trade organization supported
    probably since its founding. I wasn’t there at the inception, I was in high
    school, but –


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Scott Miller using “BRT” – that is an acronym for Business
    Roundtable.


    MR. MILLER: For the Business Roundtable. But they’ve long been – long been
    the leaders in advocating for open markets. And my experience with the –
    with the CEOs who are active in the Business Roundtable, they tend to see
    the world as an economic unit and they’re trying to serve consumers
    wherever they might be. And their views translate pretty well with a – with
    a – with a free trade agenda and not so much with the America first agenda
    of this administration.


    MR. BOLTEN: Well, let me – let me put a gloss on that, Scott, because, yes,
    they see the world as a – as an economic unit because that’s the world in
    which they operate.


    MR. MILLER: Correct.


    MR. BOLTEN: These are big, multinational corporations. But they are also
    almost exclusively in the Business Roundtable American-based companies. And
    so they come together at the BRT to advocate on behalf of good policy that
    will be good for the U.S. economy overall.


    MR. MILLER: Fair enough.


    MR. BOLTEN: But there’s no inconsistency between being –


    MR. MILLER: Right. Those aren’t – those aren’t different.


    MR. BOLTEN: They are not different. And that is maybe the fundamental
    point, which is that a strong global economy, a strong open international
    trading system is essential to the prosperity and prospects of a strong
    U.S. economy.


    MR. REINSCH: Do you think the Trump administration sees it that way?


    MR. BOLTEN: No. Certainly the president doesn’t see it that way. And I
    think many of his senior advisers, at least in the trade area, do not
    either.


    MR. REINSCH: Like I said, I have two questions. One is, how do you
    compartmentalize? You’ve got one dialogue that’s a happy one on the tax and
    regulatory side and one dialogue that sounds like it’s an unhappy one. Do
    they end up sort of canceling each other out or compromising each other? Or
    are you able to maintain two dialogues separately?


    And on the trade side, do you really have a dialogue? I mean, do they pay
    attention? Are you making inroads philosophically?


    MR. BOLTEN: We don’t really have to segment because we have a good dialogue
    across the board with the Trump administration. And that’s one of the
    things that the CEOs in my organization have really appreciated, which is
    that even when there’s disagreement, there has always been receptivity and
    genuine listening on the part of the Trump administration to the point of
    view that our CEOs are presenting, so we’ve got a good relationship with
    the White House and it’s not just tax and regulatory policy. In particular,
    there’s been a good focus from this White House on workforce policy about
    which our members care a great day and which is itself closely linked to
    the disaffections that have created and anti-globalization that I think
    drives a lot of at least Trump administration politics. So we’re glad to be
    in sync with the administration on those issues.


    On the trade issues, we’ve just disagreed strongly on a number of points.
    They’ve heard us out, but they haven’t trimmed their sails very much, or at
    least it’s not particularly visible to us. So it’s hard to say that we feel
    like we’ve had a major impact on the trajectory of administration trade
    policy.


    And, Bill, I should add one other thing, which is that we don’t disagree on
    everything. There are a number of things in Trump administration trade
    policy on which we’ve agreed, but we have strongly disagreed on the
    imposition of national security tariffs on steel and aluminum and the
    fallout from that. We have strongly disagreed on the way in which the
    administration pursued the NAFTA negotiations and some of the outcomes of
    that. But there are also areas of agreement.


    MR. REINSCH: Is that going to stop you from supporting the outcome on
    USMCA?


    MR. BOLTEN: I doubt it. I mean, there are improvements we would still like
    to see them do if necessary through implementing legislation or side
    letters, but –


    MR. REINSCH: So are you working with the Congress on that?


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah. I mean, the Business Roundtable always is in close touch
    with allies on the Hill. And I expect we will – we will find ourselves
    working hard in harness with the administration to put a new
    U.S.-Mexico-Canada agreement into place when the time comes.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: So a few things have changed within this administration in
    the past few months, but not on trade, and a few things have changed in
    Congress that probably will impact trade, a new Democratic Congress. How
    are you negotiating the landscape in Congress, say, for instance, on the
    new USMCA, the former NAFTA agreement?


    MR. BOLTEN: The U.S. Trade Representative has, in putting together their
    negotiation from the beginning, the USTR seemed to feel that there was a
    good prospect of bringing along labor Democrats to support the new
    agreement. We have always been more skeptical of that and believe that the
    path to getting this and other trade agreements through is likely to be the
    relatively well-worn path that The Trade Guys themselves have trod many
    times over the course of your careers, and that is a coalition of most
    Republicans plus moderate, pro-trade, pro-growth Democrats. And I happen to
    believe that that will be the path for approval of trade agreements in the
    new Congress as well. Democratic control in the House now makes that task
    more difficult, but I don’t think it makes it impossible.


    MR. REINSCH: Let me ask about that. One of the – one of my hypotheses has
    been, based on some very rough research we did here, is that the incoming
    Democratic freshmen, not the – not just the ones that flipped the seat, but
    the ones that succeeded, older Democrats – that that’s a class that is not
    entirely, but relatively more pro-trade than other Democrats and that the
    net the party is slowly and more than microscopically shifting in a
    pro-trade direction.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: More of the Democrats who were elected are closer to the
    center. They ran closer to the center. I mean, this is with the exception
    of the ones who are getting all the headlines, Ocasio-Cortez.


    MR. REINSCH: Yes. And they’re also from the – and they’re also from the
    coasts, which tend to be particularly –


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Right. And the – and the suburbs.


    MR. REINSCH: Which tend to be more pro-trade. Have you – I mean, is that
    your perception as well or have you not looked into it?


    MR. BOLTEN: We have looked at it and that’s our hope. It needs to be
    proven. But I think – I think it’s a hypothesis that there’s good evidence
    so far to support. And you see good leadership among Democrats among the
    more moderate Democrats, among the new Democrats. You think of somebody
    like Derek Kilmer from the Seattle area, who’s the leader of the new
    Democrats, who I think could be a very effective leader for that portion of
    the Democratic Caucus, that is likely to be amenable to supporting good
    trade agreements.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: What happens when new members who are getting a lot of ink,
    like Ocasio-Cortez, start to decide that they want to get involved in trade
    policy and they come over and knock on your door at the Business
    Roundtable? How do you work with them?


    MR. BOLTEN: You know, we’ll work with all of them. We had several of our
    CEOs go to the session that Kennedy School runs every year for the –


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Yeah, CSIS is part of that actually.


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: We’re one of the sponsoring organizations.


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah, and it’s a – it’s a great program. And we appreciated
    very much having the opportunity to send a few of our CEOs. And the ones
    that went – the ones that went were Dennis Muilenburg from Boeing, Mary
    Barra from GM and Alex Gorsky from J&J. And it was an opportunity for
    them to not just, you know, talk, go straight in and talk policy, but tell
    some of their own personal stories about where they’re – where they came
    from and what their aspirations are for their companies and workers. And
    that’s an – it’s that kind of opportunity where you actually begin to show
    Alexandria –


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Ocasio-Cortez, yeah.


    MR. BOLTEN: – Ocasio-Cortez, somebody like that, that a Mary Barra is not
    really coming from all that different a place. I mean, Mary started out
    putting mufflers on Pontiacs was the – was the beginning of her career. And
    so as we think about making our arguments to an audience that isn’t
    necessarily receptive at the outset, it’s opportunities like that where we
    begin to show, hey, these are – you know, these CEOs are real people who
    are trying to do the best for their workers, not just increase their own
    pay and increase the dividends.


    MR. MILLER: Yeah, they’re not Scrooge McDuck sitting in his vault, you
    know, tossing gold coins.


    MR. BOLTEN: They are not. They are not. And those – and that’s the people
    that I see every day at the Business Roundtable. And that’s part of our job
    is to portray that to a lot of new and now increasingly important members
    in the Congress whose first inclination is to be hostile to corporate
    leaders.


    MR. MILLER: Well, and, look, at a practical level, you need 218 votes to
    pass an implementing bill in the House. You actually don’t care where those
    votes come from. It doesn’t matter who does it. I mean, for years Mrs.
    Jackson Lee of Texas was a hard no on trade agreements. But in 2015 when
    the bill on Trade Promotion Authority was about to fail in the House, Mrs.
    Jackson Lee voted aye and so these things happen. And all you needed was
    218.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Well, there used to be a civil discussion around trade,
    right? I mean, there use to – it used to be it was an issue, like a lot of
    issues in national security, where you could have a civil policy
    discussion, but now trade has become a lot more politicized and we have The
    Trade Guys, you know, talking about this on our – on our show.


    MR. MILLER: Well, honestly, it’s become a lot more complicated, too. And
    that’s one of the reasons it’s gotten difficult for members.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Yeah. But we’re now in 2019 and we’ve got a Democratic
    Congress, we’ve got a Republican Senate, we’ve got an administration that
    isn’t getting along with some people in its own party and it’s not getting
    along with – certainly getting along with Democrats. How is there going to
    be a civil discussion on trade?


    Like, let’s take the USMCA where, you know, you have some disagreements
    with them, but you’re working through it with them. Is there likely to be a
    civil process here where we can work through policy on trade, like, that
    it’s this critical to our country and our national security, without having
    a complete political blowup?


    MR. BOLTEN: Well, that’s our job and so I certainly hope so. It’s our job
    to advance that civil discourse.


    You know, one of the – one of the problems with trade debates – it’s always
    been true, but it’s even more so now – is that trade becomes a surrogate
    for almost every kind of social ill. So you can’t – it’s impossible to hold
    back the tide of technological change, as much as people might try to, but
    no one will say I’m trying to hold back technological progress. What they
    will say is I’m trying to prevent the foreigners from being unfair to us.
    And politically, people resonate with that and that’s always been true
    going back to the days when, you know, Bill Reinsch and I were first
    working in the Senate 30-some years ago, but it’s more true today. And
    there are a lot more people who feel that they have been victimized by
    globalization, many with some justification. And if we’re going to do our
    job right, we need to speak to those people and the members who represent
    them.


    MR. REINSCH: Well, you know, the roundtable in the past has produced, I
    thought, some really useful and important studies on exactly that point,
    talking about the benefits of trade, the benefits of globalization to
    everybody and to working people.


    Unfortunately, you know, memories tend to be short and, you know, something
    you did five years ago nobody remembers now. Partly in my case it’s
    dementia setting in. (Laughter.) But in most cases, you know, it just –


    MR. MILLER: Well, in the case of the Congress, they weren’t here.


    MR. REINSCH: And in the case of Congress, they’re all new. Do you have
    anything new in the works? I mean, do you see, you know, some, I mean,
    actual research coming out that’s going to help shape the debate?


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah, we’ve –


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Well, you guys talk a lot about worker retraining.


    MR. BOLTEN: We do. But we also have done some over the course of the last
    year or so on the benefits of trade and we’ve tried to break it down by
    state so that the story is as local as possible. And we’ve also tried to,
    in particular, to demonstrate the benefits that NAFTA brought to the
    country. Because one of the – one of the challenges we face is that really
    no party has found it in its political interest to highlight what I firmly
    believe is the truth about NAFTA, which is it has – it has been
    overwhelmingly positive, not just for Mexico and Canada, but for the United
    States economy and that the loss of NAFTA would be devastating to hundreds
    of thousands, maybe millions of the working people whom President Trump is
    trying to protect and promote.


    MR. MILLER: This is a really tough job, though, because you have 25 years
    of the critics never stopping in their criticism.


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah. Right.


    MR. MILLER: And the proponents of the NAFTA – we were doing something else
    I guess – but no one was responding to the criticism.


    MR. BOLTEN: Staying quiet. Well, here’s a – here’s a criticism I have of
    the Obama administration. And I don’t intend it to be partisan. But, I
    mean, I give the Obama administration a lot of credit for a lot of things
    they did, including the vigorous pursuit of the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
    But President Obama tried to slice the salami a little too thin and he went
    around saying NAFTA bad, TPP good. And if the president is saying NAFTA
    bad, there’s going to be nobody out there defending it and giving the –
    giving the positive side of the story, which I believe is the overwhelming
    side of the story.


    And so you go into an election like 2016 when both candidates are trying to
    outdo each other. It’s almost an accepted catechism that NAFTA has been bad
    for the working man and then they try to outdo each other in their
    opposition to TPP and the U.S. economy is badly harmed by that.


    MR. REINSCH: So let me ask for a projection then. We are probably facing a
    situation where the president at some point is going to announce he’s going
    to withdraw from old NAFTA. And that leaves the Congress with a choice:
    vote for my new NAFTA or nothing. What do you guys do at that point? And
    how will that influence the debate? Congress can’t possibly be happy about
    that because they’re being jammed and they’ll moan and whine and complain
    and that doesn’t mean that they won’t do what he wants in the end. But how
    do you react in that situation? Because it creates the possibility of what
    I agree is the worst of all worlds, which is nothing, you know, no old
    NAFTA and no new NAFTA.


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah. And you and I are in agreement on that certainly that,
    you know, old NAFTA was, from my perspective, with some tweaks, working
    extremely well. New NAFTA, I think, would also be very positive for the
    U.S. economy. No NAFTA would be a disaster.


    And that’s one of the reasons why we have done our best from day one of the
    Trump administration to discourage the president even from threatening
    withdrawal from NAFTA, because even that alone has detrimental effects. I’m
    inclined to agree with you that if the situation begins to look difficult
    enough for the administration, that the president will be very tempted just
    to withdraw from NAFTA and then give the Congress a stark choice between
    his new USMCA and no NAFTA. I happen to think that would be a big mistake
    because it would likely repel the very Democratic votes, moderate
    Democratic votes that we were just talking about, from supporting.


    MR. REINSCH: And it sounds as it Lighthizer believes that, too. But we’ll
    see what happens.


    MR. BOLTEN: I think so. I think so, but, you know, as with many things, I
    think it’s just going to come down to a presidential instinct about how to
    handle a negotiation.


    MR. MILLER: Well, it’s a strange instinct to be prepared to do harm to the
    U.S. economy right before your reelection campaign starts.


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah.


    MR. MILLER: But then again, he’s not a – he’s not a normal politician.


    MR. BOLTEN: It reminds me – it reminds me of “Blazing Saddles” where the –
    where the sheriff puts the gun to his own head. (Laughter.)


    MR. MILLER: I think he’s really serious.


    MR. BOLTEN: Right and says, you know, nobody move or the –


    MR. MILLER: Sheriff gets it.


    MR. BOLTEN: Or the – or the orange-haired guy gets it.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: And how do you prepare for this kind of presidential
    instinct? How do you prepare for that?


    MR. BOLTEN: You know, it’s hard to prepare, but we are advocating
    strenuously and at every occasion we get to the administration and to the
    president directly that withdrawal from NAFTA would be a huge mistake. And
    we remain at least cautiously optimistic that the new NAFTA can be put
    through the Congress without resorting to that very dangerous threat.
    Because it – I mean, once the president actually pulls that trigger, there
    may be no way to un-pull it. And that really does court disaster in the –
    in the U.S. economy and for the ordinary – for the ordinary working man and
    woman.


    So that’s the case we’ve been taking to the president. The president likes
    CEOs. He’s always been very receptive to listening to our folks. So we do
    everything we can on that score.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: He likes CEOs and he likes generals until he doesn’t.


    MR. BOLTEN: The members of the roundtable, even though very few, if any of
    them actually worked with him in his business career, these are the types
    of folks that he’s – that he’s accustomed to, have been dealing with in his
    business life. He views them as peers. And they are folks who tend to speak
    pretty candidly, even to powerful people.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Which he likes and respects.


    MR. BOLTEN: Which I think he likes and respects. And so –


    MR. REINSCH: Do you think he likes people telling him he’s wrong?


    MR. SCHWARTZ: I don’t know about that, but I think he likes people who he
    considers peers telling it like it is.


    MR. BOLTEN: Yeah, I agree with that.


    MR. REINSCH: Well, as long as they tell him he’s right.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: I don’t know.


    MR. BOLTEN: No, no, no. I’ve had several of our CEOs go in and have very
    direct conversations with the president where they just disagree. And it
    has not been, according to their reports, it has not been disagreeable.


    MR. REINSCH: Good.


    MR. BOLTEN: The president seems to welcome that conversation.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: I’m going to ask The Trade Guys and then you, Josh, if you
    had to predict what’s going to happen with the new NAFTA, USMCA, and old
    NAFTA, what would you say?


    Scott?


    MR. MILLER: I think the bill faces an uncertain future in the Congress. And
    my reasons are pretty straightforward. First, I think that this is a unique
    sort of backfooted approach by the administration. This administration did
    not build its grassroots coalition before and during the negotiation; and
    therefore, it doesn’t have one when the negotiations ended. They did not do
    the kind of vote-by-vote and company-by-company work that has been done in
    the past and is sort of – was a core – it was a core element to every
    successful campaign.


    Second, I think that there is a great underestimation by the administration
    of how complicated trade is for the Democratic Party at this point,
    particularly House Democrats, given their fundraising sources, given their
    vote histories. This is really a tough issue. It was tough for Mrs. Pelosi
    in her first speakership. The first time that the Congress passed a bill
    that did not have a majority of Democratic support, it was – it happened –
    it happened with the Peru free trade agreement. U.S.-Peru FTA passed the
    Congress in her speakership, did not have a majority of Democrats
    supporting it. These votes are very difficult.


    And the third reason is the Congress, when it doesn’t want to do something,
    has awesome, awesome skills to not deal with it and to push it off into the
    future. And I think that I agree with Bill, who has made the comment a
    number of times, that there will be a frontend renegotiation probably of
    the labor provisions. But even after that happens, I think both the absence
    of a – of a grassroots coalition that is supportive of the new agreement,
    not just nodding their head, but is willing to go advocate for it, and the
    complexity of the party, that this will – this bill just won’t come up in
    the House, in my view.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Bill Reinsch?


    MR. REINSCH: Well, I’m in a different place. I think it’s going to come up,
    I think it’s going to pass, I think it’ll be done by the August recess. I
    think there will be a lot of drama between now and then, major drama.


    I think the Democrats will do what Scott just said I said they would do,
    which is say it’s not good enough, we need more. They’ll focus on labor
    because that’s something that is near and dear to their hearts and near and
    dear to their pocketbooks as well.


    And I think it’s an area where the administration actually can get more.
    Other people, possibly including the roundtable, will try to climb aboard
    the train and say, well, if you’re going to fix one thing, here are five
    more things you ought to fix and we’ll see, you know, how long the train
    gets before that happens. But at some point, Ambassador Lighthizer goes and
    does something, comes back with something.


    The happy-ending scenario is the Democrats say, ah, you know, it was no
    good before, we made you fix it and you did fix it and now some of us, not
    all of us, but some of us can vote for it. And you get the Republicans who
    I think will vote for it because – the pro-trade Republicans will vote for
    it because net it’s a good agreement. The antitrade, if you will,
    Republicans will vote for it because Trump has given them cover. Who’s
    going to be more protectionist than Donald Trump? If he says this is the
    greatest agreement ever – which is what he’ll say, we know that, safest
    prediction of all – then who in his party is going to stand up and say no,
    it’s not? So I think you put the coalition together that way.


    What he will do – and this will put Josh in an awkward position – is I
    think he will at some point announce he’s withdrawing from the – from the
    old NAFTA, because for him it’s about leverage and that’s the way he thinks
    he’ll leverage the Congress. And I hate to say it because it’s a hardball
    play and it’s annoying, but I think it’ll work. He will leverage the
    Congress.


    But at the end of the day, I think the bulk of them will analyze the
    situation actually in the way that Josh has analyzed it, which is the
    worst-possible outcome here is nothing. And if you’re going to take away
    one choice and leave us with a binary choice of passing the new one or
    nothing, I think more of them are going to opt for passing the new one.


    I think – and Scott and I disagree on this part – that, you know, once the
    president ultimately submits a bill, you know, then there’s a clock and
    they have to deal with it unless the speaker does what she did on –


    MR. MILLER: Colombia.


    MR. REINSCH: – Colombia in ’08 and pulls the plug.


    MR. BOLTEN: Panama and Korea.


    MR. MILLER: Yes.


    MR. REINSCH: And I have a feeling this time around that I just don’t think
    that – I don’t think they’ll do that. I think the situation in her own
    caucus is going to be more complicated. And this is what we were talking
    about earlier. There’s a lot of people that have not changed their views
    about trade generally, about the impact of globalization on the worker. I
    think you’re going to hear from all those people. You’ve heard from all of
    them so far.


    MR. MILLER: Yeah.


    MR. REINSCH: But you haven’t – what you haven’t heard from a lot of them is
    and what you haven’t heard from the Democrats for the last two years is
    that they’ve tended to oppose not so much the policy, but the
    implementation of the policy and the collateral damage. He’s not doing it
    right, there’s not enough consultation, there’s not enough transparency and
    they’re hurting all these other people. The tariffs, for example, are
    hurting various actors.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: He’s not doing it the way he’s supposed to be doing it.


    MR. REINSCH: He’s not doing it the way he’s supposed to do it. That leaves
    them an opening to come back and say do it a better way and we can support
    it. So I think – I think they get there, but with a lot of drama in
    between.


    MR. MILLER: Now, just keep in mind we’re sitting here forecasting that
    Speaker Pelosi is going to assist the president in keeping a major campaign
    promise, which is renegotiating NAFTA.


    MR. REINSCH: But this is the Democrats –


    MR. SCHWARTZ: This is why you think there’s no way.


    MR. MILLER: Well, look, we’re sitting here in now, what, tomorrow will be
    the longest-ever government shutdown, because of a campaign promise.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Tomorrow it’s 19 days, 20 days?


    MR. REINSCH: Yeah.


    MR. MILLER: Something like that.


    MR. REINSCH: Josh may disagree with me on this, but one of the Democrats’
    great weaknesses is at the end of the day they do what’s good for the
    country, unlike the Republicans. (Laughter.)


    MR. MILLER: The resistance is strong, my son. The resistance is strong.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: This is – this is – see? I knew – I knew – I knew The Trade
    Guys would heat up at some point, man. Oh!


    MR. REINSCH: At the end of the day, they will fold because they care about
    the country and they know that this is the right answer.


    MR. MILLER: Well, this is going to be fascinating to watch.


    MR. REINSCH: The Republicans will –


    MR. SCHWARTZ: You’re sitting next to two compassionate conservatives, I
    want you to know.


    MR. REINSCH: Is that right? Josh and who else?


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Scott, yeah. They do the right – they do the right thing,
    too.


    MR. REINSCH: But they’re not in charge.


    MR. MILLER: I also care about the country.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: Yeah, I mean –


    MR. REINSCH: Trump’s in charge.


    MR. BOLTEN: I wouldn’t try to characterize this debate as to who cares most
    about the country. (Laughter.)


    MR. REINSCH: I was goaded into it by Andrew.


    MR. BOLTEN: There will be – there will be heavy politics here.


    MR. MILLER: Yes.


    MR. BOLTEN: I come out closer to Bill than I do to Scott on this question.
    I am cautiously optimistic that somehow a path will be found to get this
    done probably in 2019. But, you know, there’s one – both of you all just
    talked about elements that can be thrown in by the administration to make
    it easier to get the votes that they need, especially in the House. And
    there’s one element that I think is critical in that and that is the
    removal of the steel and aluminum tariffs –


    MR. MILLER: Agree completely.


    MR. BOLTEN: – from at least Mexico and Canada.


    MR. MILLER: Agree totally.


    MR. BOLTEN: That has been a huge problem economically. And now to have
    cascading behind it the threat of doing the same with all auto trade I
    think really poisons the well up on the Hill. So the one step that I think
    the administration can take to make the Bill Reinsch scenario the much more
    plausible one is to reach some kind of accommodation which lets at least
    Canada and Mexico out from under the very damaging steel and aluminum
    tariffs that are in place and then correspondingly permits Canada and
    Mexico to remove the retaliation that they’ve put on U.S. exporters,
    especially agricultural exporters.


    (Music plays.)


    MR. SCHWARTZ: To our listeners, if you have a question for The Trade Guys,
    write us at TradeGuys@CSIS.org. That’s TradeGuys@CSIS.org. We’ll read some
    of your emails and have The Trade Guys react to it. We’re also now on
    Spotify. So you can find us there when you’re listening to the Rolling
    Stones or you’re listening to Tom Petty or whatever you’re listening to you
    can definitely listen to The Trade Guys.


    Thank you, Trade Guys.


    MR. MILLER: Thanks, Andrew.


    MR. REINSCH: Thank you.


    MR. SCHWARTZ: You’ve been listening to The Trade Guys, a CSIS podcast.


    (END)
      