
        Sixth Annual CSIS South China Sea Conference
      Tuesday, July 12, 2016 9:00 am - 5:15 pmCSIS Headquarters  This event has reached capacity. Registrations are closed.
 The CSIS Southeast Asia Program and Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative are pleased to present the Sixth Annual CSIS South China Sea Conference on Tuesday, July 12, 2016.
 Coming hours after the Permanent Court of Arbitration will issue its verdict on China's territorial claims in the South China Sea, this full-day conference examines both longstanding and emerging issues in one of the world’s most contentious zones. It will feature speakers from throughout the region, including those from claimant countries. Panels will review recent developments, engage on relevant legal and military issues, and discuss the wider geo-strategic implications for the region. This year, CSIS will feature for the first time a panel discussing the environmental costs of recent military developments on the ecosystem of the South China Sea.
 Please note that the agenda is subject to last-minute change.
 9:00 a.m.  Briefing on the Philippines v China Arbitration Award
 Gregory Poling Director, Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative; and Fellow, Southeast Asia Program Center for Strategic and International Studies
 9:15 a.m.  Keynote Speech   Senator Dan Sullivan Committee on Armed Services United States Senate   Introduction: John J. Hamre President and CEO Center for Strategic and International Studies
 Moderator: Murray Hiebert Senior Adviser and Deputy Director, Southeast Asia Program Center for Strategic and International Studies   10:00 a.m.  Legal Issues and Next Steps
 Julia Xue Academy Senior Fellow International Law Programme Chatham House, the Royal Institute of International Affairs
 Henry Bensurto Consul General Philippine Consulate General in San Francisco
 James Kraska Professor of Oceans Law and Policy Stockton Center for the Study of International Law U.S. Naval War College   Erik Franckx Member, Permanent Court of Arbitration; and President, Department of International and European Law Vrije Universiteit, Brussels, Belgium
 Moderator: Bonnie Glaser Senior Adviser for Asia and Director, China Power Project Center for Strategic and International Studies
 11:15 a.m.  Coffee Break
 11:30 a.m.  The South China Sea in 2016   RADM Michael McDevitt (USN, Ret.) Senior Fellow in Strategic Studies CNA Corporation   Shen Dingli Vice Dean of the Institute of International Affairs Fudan University, Shanghai, China   Nguyen Vu Tung Acting President Diplomatic Academy of Vietnam   Elina Noor Director for Foreign Policy and Security Studies Institute of Strategic and International Studies, Malaysia   Moderator: Murray Hiebert Senior Adviser and Deputy Director, Southeast Asia Program Center for Strategic and International Studies   12:45 p.m.  Lunch Served   1:15 p.m.  Lunch Keynote   Daniel J. Kritenbrink Senior Director for Asian Affairs National Security Council
 Moderator: Murray Hiebert Senior Adviser and Deputy Director, Southeast Asia Program Center for Strategic and International Studies   1:45 p.m.  Military Modernization and Capacity Building   Timothy Heath Senior International Defense Research Analyst RAND Corporation   Natalie Sambhi Research Fellow Perth USAsia Centre   Carlyle Thayer Emeritus Professor University of New South Wales Australian Defence Force Academy   Tetsuo Kotani Senior Fellow Japan Institute of International Affairs
 Moderator: COL Desmond Walton (Ret.) Senior Associate (Non-resident), Southeast Asia Program Center for Strategic and International Studies
 3:00 p.m.  Coffee Break
 3:15 p.m.  The Environmental Question   John McManus Professor of Marine Biology and Fisheries; and Director, National Center for Coral Reef Research University of Miami   Edgardo Gomez University Professor Emeritus and National Scientist Marine Science Institute University of the Philippines   Kwang-Tsao Shao Research Fellow and Executive Officer, Biodiversity Research Center Academia Sinica, Taiwan   Dan Liu Associate Researcher, Centre for Polar and Deep Ocean Development Shanghai Jiao Tong University   Moderator: Gregory Poling  Director, Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative; and Fellow, Southeast Asia Program Center for Strategic and International Studies   4:30 p.m.  Adjourn
 4:45 p.m. Following the adjournment, Ambassador Cui Tiankai will deliver remarks live-streamed here.
 This event is made possible by general support to CSIS.
      
              CSIS Experts
        
    
          
  
  
  
  
  
  
      

      
      
      
      
    
  
  John J. Hamre

      CSIS President and CEO
  
  

      
      
      
      
  
      
      Twitter
    
  

    
  
  Murray Hiebert

      Senior Associate (Non-resident), Southeast Asia Program
  
  

      
      
      
      
  
      
      Twitter
    
  

    
  
  Bonnie S. Glaser

      Senior Adviser for Asia; Director, China Power Project
  
  

      
      
      
      
    
  
  Gregory B. Poling

      Director, Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, and Fellow, Southeast Asia Program
  
  

      
      
      
      
    
  
  Desmond Walton

      Senior Associate (Non-resident), Southeast Asia Program
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

    
    
            