
        ISP Brief December 2018
December 21, 2018It's our pleasure to send you the December Edition of the ISP Brief, the monthly newsletter of the CSIS International Security Program. The ISP Brief features articles and commentary written by our scholars including analysis as published in various media sources (including video and audio highlights) and links to recent events. We hope the newsletter provides you, our readers, a snapshot of the excellent work underway in ISP, and the engaging thoughts of our experts. As always, your feedback is welcome.

Featured Events

Maritime Security Dialogue: A Conversation with the Hon. Richard V. Spencer, Secretary of the Navy 
The Honorable Richard V. Spencer, 76th Secretary of the Navy joined CSIS for a Maritime Security Dialogue. Secretary Spencer discussed the state of the Navy and Marine Corps and innovation in the naval domain.


From the IRA to the Islamic State: The Evolving Terrorism Threat in Europe 
Europe faces a significant threat from terrorism, particularly from Islamic extremists and far-right groups. Seth G. Jones and Maxwell Markusen of the Transnational Threats Program explore how Europe compiles new data on the threats and the counterterrorism response by European governments.

Photo credit: Valery Hache/WFP/Getty Images

Bad Ideas in National Security 
Defense360's Bad Ideas in National Security series features short articles from both CSIS and outside scholars on recently considered and not too obvious bad ideas in the defense and foreign policy space.


Five Risks to Watch in 2019 
In a word, vertigo will define the uncertainty of 2019. Samuel Brannen, Director, Risk and Foresight Group, outlines five global risks to watch out for in 2019 in his latest publication.

Photo: ktsdesign/Adobe Stock

Congrats!  We would also like to give a special congratulations to Suzanne Spaulding on her recent appointment to the Cyberspace Solarium Commission! The Commission is tasked with developing a unified, strategic response to the numerous challenges that cyberspace presents as well as the abundant opportunities it affords.




Publications

READ  - "The Mattis Resignation: What Does it Mean for the Future of National Security" by Mark F. Cancian, Todd Harrison, and Andrew Hunter

READ  - "Why Putin Targets Minorities" by Suzanne Spaulding

READ  - "Bad Idea: Competing with China (without Knowing What Winning Looks Like)" by John Schaus

READ  - "Bad Idea: Conflating the Space Force with NASA" by Kaitlyn Johnson

READ  - "Bad Idea: Sectored Air and Missile Defense Radars" by Thomas Karako

READ  - "Bad Idea: Demanding Allies Spend Two Percent of GDP on Defense" by Todd Harrison and Seamus P. Daniels

READ  - "Bad Idea: Scrapping the Federal Acquisition Regulation" by Andrew Hunter

READ  - "Mattis Vs. Mulvaney: The Coming Budget Clash & The Reagan Legacy" by Mark F. Cancian

READ  - "Bad Idea: Relying on Bad Schedule Estimates to Promote Agile Programs" by Gregory Sanders

READ  - "Bad Idea: Expecting the Private Sector to Drive Innovation in National Security" by Samuel Brannen

READ  - "Bad Idea: Moving OCO Back into the Base Budget (While Negotiating a Budget Deal)" by Seamus P. Daniels

READ  - "Bad Idea: Creating a U.S. Department of Cybersecurity" by Suzanne Spaulding and Mieke Eoyang

READ  - "Bad Idea: Using the Phrase 'Military Requirements'" by Mark F. Cancian

READ  - "Bad Idea: Ignoring the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" by Bernadette Stadler and Suzanne Claeys




Multimedia

WATCH  - Kathleen H. Hicks spoke on a panel at the 2018 Reagan National Defense Forum assessing the U.S strategy, presence, and interests in the Middle East.


LISTEN  - Beverly Kirk, Director, Smart Women, Smart Power Initiative, sits down with 2018 Eisenhower Fellow Wafaa AlAshwali, CEO and Co-Founder of Serviis, a Saudi Arabia-based digital platform and local marketplace. They discuss how her company and others like it are opening up new opportunites for women entrepreneurs in her country.


LISTEN  - Andrew Hunter, Director, Defense-Industrial Initiatives Group, spoke with Roger Waldron on Off the Shelf about key defense acquisition trends for 2018. They also discuss the importance of an artificial intelligence ecosystem to national security.

LISTEN  - The Crisis Next Door podcast interviewed Seth G. Jones in their latest episode "U-S Says See Ya to Syria."

WATCH  - Todd Harrison, Director, Defense Budget Analysis sat down on Defense News Weekly to discuss how much a Space Force could cost.


LISTEN  - Todd Harrison joined the Defense One Radio podcast to talk about the U.S. military budget in fiscal year 2020, and the proposed $50 billion increase in spending.

WATCH  - ABC News spoke with Seth G. Jones about the recent decision to pull troops from Syria and the latest Transnational Threats Project report "The Evolution of the Salafi-Jihadist Threat."





Upcoming Events

Maritime Security Dialoge: Future Fleet Manning and Training from the Senior Enlisted Perspective 
January 10, 2019
10:00 a.m. - 11:30 a.m.
CSIS Headquarters, 1616 Rhode Island Ave, NW 

Rape as a Weapon of War: A Conversation with Former Kosovo President Atifete Jahjaga
January 30, 2019
5:30 p.m. - 6:30 p.m.
CSIS Headquarters, 1616 Rhode Island Ave, NW




In Case You Missed It

Book Launch: Small Wars, Big Data 
December 13, 2018


Book Launch: Rules for Rebels 
December 5, 2018





Media Highlights

"The U.S. is clearly in a position where a big chunk of the government has moved on, or is moving on, from terrorism." - Seth G. Jones in   The Wall Street Journal   on December 20, 2018.

"The good news is there's a bipartisan consensus that the nation needs icebreakers, and it's in the budget, they've done the design work, so there'll be icebreakers. The bad news is that, because of budget caps, they are in competition with the wall and border security." Mark F. Cancian in  USNI News  on December 19, 2018.

"Rather than trying to consolidate in a shrinking market and cutting costs, companies are positioning themselves for growth." - Andrew Hunter in   Los Angeles Times   on December 7, 2018

"We have issues that we need to continue to address in this country, but that does not mean that we sit back and let an adversary exploit those issues for the purpose of weakening us. Russia's goal is not to make us better." - Suzanne Spaudling in   The Washington Post   on December 5, 2018.

"Russia's had treaty-violating missiles for years, so they're not fooling anybody by alleging that they'd have to start building treaty-violating missiles. It's a transparent ploy to put the onus back on the U.S., but it won't work." - Tom Karako in   CNBC   on December 5, 2018
      