
        The Evening: Terror in France, China Tariffs, Mad Dogs and Englishmen and More
December 11, 2018Good Evening,

It's Tuesday, December 11th.

Terror in France

A gunman killed at least four people and wounded 11 others near a Christmas market in the French border city of Strasbourg on Tuesday evening before being cornered by police, as Reuters  reports.

France 24 has the latest on this  developing story.

U.S.-China Trade Talks

China agreed to reduce tariffs on U.S. autos to 15%, down from 40% currently, during a phone call with U.S. officials that opened the latest round of trade talks aimed at settling a trade dispute festering between the world’s two largest economic powers, as the WSJ’s Bob Davis and Lingling Wei  report.

Meanwhile, the Trump administration is preparing a series of actions this week to call out Beijing for what it says are China’s continued efforts to steal America’s trade secrets and advanced technologies and compromise sensitive government and corporate computers, as the Washington Post’s Ellen Nakashima and David Lynch  report.

Dive Deeper: “How 5G Will Shape Innovation and Security,” by CSIS’s Jim Lewis.

“The New Old Threat of Chinese Industrial Cyber Espionage,” by CFR’s Adam Segal.

Macron's Concessions

France is on course to overshoot the European Union’s budget deficit ceiling next year without new spending cuts after President Emmanuel Macron caved in to anti-government street protests, as Reuters’ Leigh Thomas  reports.

Dive Deeper: “The French ‘Yellow Vest’ Movement and the (Current) Failure of Representative Democracy,” by the Peterson Institute’s Olivier Blanchard.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


CSIS’s Trade Guys  Crash Course

Now enrolling for CSIS Crash Course, a one-day seminar on the fundamentals of U.S. international trade policy and politics for trade professionals. This program will be conducted by CSIS experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch, known as the Trade Guys from their highly-rated weekly podcast. Information  here.

 

In That Number

5

The Arctic has been warmer over the last five years than at any time since records began in 1900, and the region is warming at twice the rate as the rest of the planet.

Source:  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s “Arctic Report Card” 

Critical Quote


“If we don’t have border security, we’ll shut down the government — this country needs border security.”


— President Donald Trump

iDeas Lab

 
Growth is impossible without energy, but  the relationship between energy and growth  is complex and often misunderstood, writes CSIS Energy expert Nikos Tsafos.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Sean Gallup/Getty Images). German Chancellor Angela Merkel and British Prime Minister Theresa May today in Berlin.

Recommended Reading

“Energy Opportunities under the Free and Open Indo-Pacific Vision,” by CSIS’s Jane Nakano.

This Town Tomorrow

At  1:30 p.m., join CSIS Global Health Policy Center for a public event to explore issues in advancing the role of women in global health policy setting and decision‑making.

Also, at  11:00 a.m., The Wilson Center will discuss anti-Americanism in Russia and anti-Russian sentiments in the U.S.

And at  4:00 p.m.  The Brookings Institution will host a panel discussion to discuss the various facets of India’s approach to the Indo-Pacific.

Video

For 25 years, the Brazilian city of Belo Horizonte has been an unsung hero in the fight against food insecurity. Today, CSIS hosted Belo Horizonte’s Food and Nutrition Secretary, Ms. Maíra Colares, as part of an expert panel to examine the promises, challenges, and determinants of durable municipal governance in food security policy. Watch the full event  here.

Podcasts


Take as Directed is the podcast series of the CSIS Global Health Policy Center. It highlights important news, events, issues, and perspectives in global health policy, particularly in infectious disease, health security, and maternal, newborn, and child health.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

Another of my favorite live albums is Joe Cocker’s “Mad Dogs & Englishmen,” released in 1970.

Cocker was a remarkable singer best known for his interpretations of music by The Beatles, Stones, Otis Redding and Dave Mason among others. For the Mad Dogs tour, he put together one of the best backing bands ever assembled. It included Leon Russell as musical director on lead guitar, piano and vocals plus Eric Clapton’s sidemen from Derek and the Dominoes (bassist Carl Radle and drummer Jim Gordon), the Stones’ horn section of Jim Price and Bobby Keys, Bob Dylan session drummer Jim Keltner and Rita Coolidge on backing vocals among many other standout performers.

The urgent sound that comes from “Mad Dogs and Englishmen” leaps out of the speakers and it still blows me away every time I listen to it.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      