
        The Evening: China Charged, Troika of Tyranny, Warren Zevon and More
November 1, 2018Good Evening,

It's Thursday, November 1st.

China Charged

A Chinese state-owned company was charged with conspiring to steal trade secrets of U.S. chipmaker Micron Technology Inc. as the Justice Department steps up actions against China in cases of suspected economic espionage, as Bloomberg’s David McLaughlin and Chris Strohm  report.

Meanwhile, President Trump said today he had a “long and very good conversation” with Chinese President Xi Jinping and signaled progress on the trade dispute between the nations, as the WSJ’s Vivian Salama and Bob Davis  report.

Dive Deeper: “Asia at the Forefront: Growth Challenges for the Next Decade and Beyond,” via the Peterson Institute.

Troika of Tyranny in Latin America

The White House will no longer appease “dictators and despots” in Latin America, National Security Adviser John Bolton said today in a Miami speech that welcomed new right-leaning leaders and put three leftist governments on notice, as McClatchy’s Franco Ordonez  reports.

Dive Deeper: “Maduro’s Mafia State,” by CSIS’s Moises Rendon.

Joint Patrols in Syria

Turkish and U.S. troops began joint patrols in northern Syria today aimed at averting clashes between Turkey and Washington’s Kurdish allies, but Turkey pressed on with a new threatened offensive nearby to crush the Kurds, as Reuters  reports.

Meanwhile, Iran’s ally Hezbollah is paying former U.S.-backed rebels to switch sides and join a growing force in southern Syria, deepening its presence near Israel’s border after appearing to withdraw to avoid Israeli airstrikes, as the  WSJ’s Sune Engel Rasmussen and Suha Ma’ayeh  report.

Dive Deeper: “Syria’s Transactional State: How the Conflict Changed the Syrian State’s Exercise of Power,” by Chatham House’s Lina Khatib and Lina Sinjab.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

2,000

Hezbollah has recruited up to 2,000 fighters by paying former U.S.-backed rebels to switch sides and join a growing force in southern Syria.
Source:  WSJ.

Critical Quote


"The Troika of Tyranny in this Hemisphere — Cuba, Venezuela, and Nicaragua — has finally met its match."


—National Security Adviser John Bolton

iDeas Lab


Our new  Russia Sanctions Tracker  charts U.S. sanctions against Russia and Russians since 2012.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images) Attorney General Jeff Sessions announces the creation of a new initiative to crack down on Chinese intelligence officials pilfering intellectual property from U.S. corporations through hacking and espionage today at the Justice Department.

Recommended Reading

Today, the CSIS Japan Chair launched  Debating Japan, a monthly publication that addresses pressing topics in Japanese policy and U.S.-Japan relations. See the first issue, "RESOLVED: It Is Good for Japan If Shinzo Abe Is Prime Minister until 2021."

This Town Tomorrow

At  9:00 a.m., Brookings will convene a panel of experts to discuss the current readiness of the U.S. military.

And at  4:00 p.m., the George Washington University Institute for European, Russian and Eurasian Studies will hold a conversation on Kyrgyzstan’s transition from communism following the collapse of the Soviet Union.

Video

The bleak health realities of North Korea are an understudied part of the larger problem of potential instability on the Korean peninsula. “The Gathering Health Storm Inside North Korea” is a new film presented by the CSIS Commission on Strengthening America’s Health Security, directed by J. Stephen Morrison and Justin Kenny.

Podcasts


The CSIS Americas Program podcast looks at the politics and policies of the 35 countries in the Western Hemisphere. This week's episode, "Free Fallin'" covers the new Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, migrants in Mexico, plebiscites on planes, and (assistant) Secretaries of State.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

I think everyone needs some more Warren Zevon in their life, I know I do. He was so, so great.  And such a smile.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      