
        The Evening: Iran Sanctions, China Trade, Blood on the Tracks and More
November 5, 2018Good Evening,

It's Monday, November 5th.

Iran Sanctions

The Trump administration today issued waivers to eight governments, exempting them from sanctions on Iranian oil that took effect at midnight, as the WSJ’s Ian Talley and Courtney McBride  report.

Dive Deeper : “The Economic Impact of Iran Sanctions,” by CSIS’s Stephanie Segal.

“Oil Market Implications of Iran Sanctions Snap-Back,” by CSIS’s Sarah Ladislaw and Andrew Stanley.

Macron's Warning

President Emmanuel Macron has ratcheted up warnings about the rising threat of far-right nationalism, saying in an interview with a regional French newspaper that complacency was what allowed for the rise of Hitler and Mussolini, as Reuters  reports.

Dive Deeper : “Chatham House Primer: National Populism” by Chatham House’s Matthew Goodwin.

Law of the Jungle Trade

China’s Xi Jinping has launched an attack on a “law of the jungle” approach to trade, remarks that will be seen as a broadside against Donald Trump ahead of a G20 summit this month where the two are due to discuss their tariff brinkmanship, as the FT's Gabriel Wildau  reports.

Dive Deeper : “Meow?” by CSIS’s Bill Reinsch.
 

AI and National Security

CSIS’s Andrew Hunter and Lindsey Sheppard today released a new report “Artificial Intelligence and National Security: The Importance of the AI Ecosystem.”

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

8

The Trump administration issued waivers to eight governments, China, India, Italy, Greece, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and Turkey which would allow them to continue “temporary” imports of Iranian crude without facing penalties.

Source:  WSJ 

Critical Quote


"I'm not sure we’ll have a meeting in Paris. Probably not.”


— President Donald Trump on whether he will meet next week with Vladimir Putin.

iDeas Lab

 
Artificial intelligence (AI) has profound potential to affect the balance of power in both the global economy and in military competition. See a new CSIS video on  building the AI ecosystem for national security, and read the recently published report  here.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Jeff J. Mitchell/Getty Images) Guess what day tomorrow is?

Recommended Reading

CSIS’s Mike Green has been awarded the Arthur Ross Book Award Silver Medal by the Council on Foreign Relations for   By More Than Providence: Grand Strategy and American Power in the Asia Pacific Since 1783   (Columbia University Press).

This Town Tomorrow

At  9:30 a.m., The Wilson Center will host Hon. Ambassador Gerónimo Gutiérrez, Mexican Ambassador to the United States, for a discussion on the changing face of Mexican immigrants.

At  10:00 a.m., CSIS will host a panel discussion on the changes in workforce development that will be brought about by the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

And at  6:00 p.m., The Brookings Institution will welcome Tawakkol Karman, the 2011 Nobel Peace Prize winner, who will discuss the conflict in Yemen and ways forward.

Video

See "A Private War," Matthew Heineman's new movie depicting the war correspondent Marie Colvin. Dubbed a "deeply distressing, authentically moving psychological study of unswerving obsession" by the New York Times, the film will be available in theaters this Thursday.

Podcasts


North Korea is the Impossible State. Each week join the people who know the most about North Korea—The Center for Strategic and International Studies’ Victor Cha, Mike Green, and Sue Mi Terry—for an insiders discussion with host H. Andrew Schwartz about the United States’ top national security priority.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

Last week Bob Dylan released “More Blood, More Tracks,” the box set reissue of “Blood on the Tracks,” widely recognized as his greatest record of the 70s. The boxset is a mammoth 6 CD collection of 87 outtakes which underscore the process which went into songs like “Tangled Up In Blue,” “Shelter From The Storm,” “Simple Twist Of Fate,” and my favorite, “Meet Me In The Morning.” If you aren’t nuts like me, and just want to hear a sample of Dylan’s craft you can listen to the 10 song sampler which is widely available on your favorite streaming service.

The opening cut, “Tangled Up In Blue (9/19/74, Take 3, Remake 3)” sounds completely different than what ended up on Dylan’s 1975 “Blood on the Tracks.” The remake version doesn’t have the bouncy, beautiful cadence that “Tangled Up In Blue” is known for. It sounds more personal and emotional. I urge you to listen to the remake. It’s even more powerful and intense than  this live version.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      