
        The Evening:  NK Warning, Saudi Lashes Out, Get Back and More
December 17, 2018Good Evening,

It's Monday, December 17th.

North Korea’s Warning

North Korea is warning that recent U.S. sanctions could take relations with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea back to the bristling tension of last year and endanger efforts to remove nuclear weapons from the Korean Peninsula, as CNN  reports.

Tough Turkey Talk

Turkey may start a new military operation in Syria at any moment, President Tayyip Erdogan said today, touting support from U.S. President Donald Trump even though the Pentagon has issued a stern warning to Ankara, as Reuters' Daren Butler and Phil Stewart  report.

Saudi Lashes Out

Saudi Arabia lashed out today at the U.S. Senate for holding the crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, personally responsible for the murder of a Saudi dissident in Istanbul, warning against interference in what it called the kingdom’s internal affairs, as the New York Times’ Ben Hubbard  reports.

Dive Deeper: “U.S.-Saudi Relations” by CFR.

Stocks Slumped

The Dow Jones Industrial Average slumped more than 500 points today as investors looked ahead to this week’s Federal Reserve meeting amid mounting signs of slowing economic growth around the world, as the WSJ’s Jessica Menton and Georgi Kantchev  report.

Dive Deeper: “No Country for Old Men? Demography’s Impact on the Global Economy,” by CSIS’s Bill Reinsch.

“What Is Globalization?” by the Peterson Institute.

Russia's Disinformation

Russia’s disinformation campaign during and after the 2016 presidential election touched nearly every top social media platform as it sought to sway U.S. voters, according to a pair of reports prepared for the Senate Intelligence Committee that offer the most detailed look yet at the Kremlin's interference effort, as Politico’s Cristiano Lima  reports.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


CSIS’s Trade Guys  Crash Course

Now enrolling for CSIS Crash Course, a one-day seminar on the fundamentals of U.S. international trade policy and politics for trade professionals. This program will be conducted by CSIS experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch, known as the Trade Guys from their highly-rated weekly podcast. Information  here.

 

In That Number

62

The U.S. military announced today that it carried out six airstrikes over the weekend against the extremist group al-Shabab in a coastal region south of Somalia’s capital, Mogadishu, killing 62 fighters.

Source:   Washington Post  

Critical Quote


"U.S. high-ranking politicians including the secretary of state have almost every day slandered the DPRK out of sheer malice."


— North Korea’s state-owned news service KCNA

iDeas Lab


Using satellite imagery, CSIS's  Beyond Parallel  program has located 13 of an estimated 20 undeclared North Korean missile operating bases. These missile bases can be used for all classes of ballistic missiles (including ICBMs), and presumably should have been identified in any final and fully verifiable denuclearization agreement.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Ezra Shaw/Getty Images). A surfer rides a wave at Mavericks today in Half Moon Bay, California. A giant swell brought waves of up to 50 feet high to Northern California.

Recommended Reading

“Bad Idea: Creating a U.S. Department of Cybersecurity,” by CSIS’s Suzanne Spaulding and Mieke Eoyang.

This Town Tomorrow

At  10:30 a.m., the Wilson Center’s Kissinger Institute will hold a discussion of Cold War rhetoric and the trends and events that drove U.S.-China bilateral relations in 2018.

Later, at  11:45 a.m., New America will have an innovative and pragmatic discussion on the importance of global leadership and cooperation for business and society.

And at  12:30 p.m., the Council on Foreign Relations will host panelists to discuss potential and ongoing crises that may erupt or escalate in 2019, as well as their global political implications.

Video

Though she survived her party’s confidence vote, British Prime Minister Theresa May still faces intense pressure over the possibility of a no Brexit deal. CSIS expert Heather Conley explains the current situation in the latest installment of our "What’s Happening" series. Watch the full video  here.

Podcasts


Fearless Afro-beats activists. Savvy tech entrepreneurs. Social disrupters. Into Africa shatters the narratives that dominate U.S. perceptions of Africa. Host Judd Devermont, Africa program director at the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) in Washington D.C., sits down with policymakers, journalists, academics and other trailblazers in African affairs to shine a spotlight on the faces spearheading cultural, political, and economic change on the continent.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

They don’t make rock stars like they used to. But on Sunday, at London’s O2 Arena, three of the greatest rock stars who ever lived—guys who defined rock stardom, got together to perform The Beatles’ “Get Back.” Here’s Paul, Ringo and Ronnie Wood. What a smile.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      