
        The Evening: Leaving Syria, Fed Rate, Harder They Come and More
December 19, 2018Good Evening,

It's Wednesday, December 19th.

Leaving Syria

The U.S. military is preparing a rapid withdrawal of its forces from Syria, administration officials said today, a move that marks an abrupt reversal of America’s strategy in the Middle East, as the WSJ’s Dion Nissenbaum and Nancy Youssef  report.

Dive Deeper:  "Trump, Erdogan, and the Surprise U.S. Troop Withdrawal from Syria," by CSIS's Bulent Aliriza.

"The Implications of the U.S. Withdrawal from Syria," by CSIS's Jon Alterman and Will Todman.

“Syria's Republican Guard: Growth and fragmentation,” by the Middle East Institute’s Gregory Waters.

Fed’s Lower Forecast

Wall Street delivered its worst response to an interest rate increase since 1994, as investors sold shares after Federal Reserve chairman Jay Powell set out to explain the reasoning behind the central bank’s decision to lower its forecasts for next year, as the FT’s Sam Fleming and Peter Wells  report.

Dive Deeper: “The Role of the U.S. Federal Reserve,” by CFR’s James McBride and Andrew Chatzky.

New Russia Sanctions

The United States imposed fresh Russia-related sanctions today, adding to a blacklist created in April to punish individuals allegedly involved in a Kremlin-backed campaign to meddle with the 2016 U.S. presidential election, as Reuters’ Nathan Lane  reports.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


CSIS’s Trade Guys  Crash Course

Now enrolling for CSIS Crash Course, a one-day seminar on the fundamentals of U.S. international trade policy and politics for trade professionals. This program will be conducted by CSIS experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch, known as the Trade Guys from their highly-rated weekly podcast. Information  here.

 

In That Number

2,000

President Trump has ordered a speedy exit for about 2,000 American forces in Syria.

Source:  WSJ 

Critical Quote


“We have defeated ISIS in Syria, my only reason for being there during the Trump Presidency.”


— President Donald Trump

iDeas Lab


As the U.S. plans to pull out of Syria, CSIS's experts comment on what this could mean for the country and the region. CSIS's Seth Jones analyzes the importance of a U.S. containment strategy in Syria. Read the full report  here.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Mark Wilson/Getty Images). Federal Reserve Board Chairman Jerome Powell today in Washington as the Fed raised short-term interest rates by a quarter percentage point.

Recommended Reading

“China’s ‘Belt and Road’ Plan in Pakistan Takes a Military Turn,” by the NYT’s Maria Abi-Habib.

This Town Tomorrow

At  9:45 a.m., the Inter-American Dialogue will host an expert panel to discuss the new wave of repression and attacks on Nicaraguan newspapers and civil society groups.

Video

Today, the CSIS Global Health Policy Center hosted a half-day conference examining the lessons learned from India’s Bihar Technical Support Program and its implications for U.S. foreign policy and assistance programs. Watch the full event  here.

Podcasts


Trade experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch break down the buzz around trade, how it affects policy, and how it impacts your day-to-day. The Trade Guys is hosted every week by H. Andrew Schwartz.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

As I mentioned yesterday, Keith Richards turned 75. If you have spent any significant time in or around Ocho Rios, Jamaica you’ll know that Richards has a home there and is a part of the reggae scene on that part of the island. To hear Richards collaborations with reggae artists over the years is a joy indeed. One of his best collaborations comes from a 1978 recording of “The Harder They Come” with the immortal Jimmy Cliff. Richards just re-released it last month and I can’t stop listening to it. It’s Dread.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      