
        The Evening: Senate Resolution on Yemen, Africa, Filmore East and More
December 13, 2018Good Evening,

It's Thursday, December 13th.

Senate Passes Resolution to Withdraw U.S. Support for War in Yemen

The U.S. Senate ignored appeals by the Trump administration and today passed a resolution to withdraw U.S. support for the Saudi-led coalition at war in Yemen, delivering a bipartisan setback for the president’s Middle East policy, as the WSJ’s Natalie Andrews and Dion Nissenbaum  report.

Dive Deeper: “After the Killing of Jamal Khashoggi: Muhammad bin Salman and the Future of Saudi-U.S. Relations,” by Gregory Gause of the Bush School of Government and Public Service, Texas A&M University.

“New Saudi Poll: Corruption a Major Concern, Divisions on Reforms and U.S. Ties,” by the Washington Institute’s David Pollock.

Iran-Linked Hackers

Iran-linked hackers have tried to break into private emails of nuclear scientists and U.S. sanctions officials, as the AP  reports.

Dive Deeper: “Iran's Precision Missile Project Moves to Lebanon,” by the Washington Institute’s Katherine Bauer, Hanin Ghaddar, and Assaf Orion.

“All Is Quiet on Iran’s Western Front, Say UN Peacekeepers,” by the Washington Institute’s Assaf Orion.

U.S. Africa Policy

President Trump plans to reshape America’s policy in Africa by challenging the continent’s leaders to make a strategic choice to align themselves with America instead of Russia or China, as national security adviser John Bolton said today in a speech at the Heritage Foundation the WSJ’s Dion Nissenbaum  reports.

Dive Deeper:  CSIS’s Judd Devermont testified yesterday before the Senate Armed Services Committee Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities. Read his testimony, “Implications of China’s Presence and Investment in Africa.”

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


CSIS’s Trade Guys  Crash Course

Now enrolling for CSIS Crash Course, a one-day seminar on the fundamentals of U.S. international trade policy and politics for trade professionals. This program will be conducted by CSIS experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch, known as the Trade Guys from their highly-rated weekly podcast. Information  here.

 

In That Number

10%

Iraq, Oman, and Saudi Arabia – spend more than 10% of their GDP on military forces, far more of their economies on military forces than the 2% of GDP goal set by NATO, and far less than the 3.11% estimated that is spent by the U.S., the 3.10% spent by Russia, and the 1.26% spent by China.

Source: “The Arab Gulf States and Iran: Military Spending, Modernization, and the Shifting Military Balance,” by CSIS’s Anthony Cordesman and Nicholas Harrington.

Critical Quote


"Great power competitors, namely China and Russia, are rapidly expanding their financial and political influence across Africa. They are deliberately and aggressively targeting their investments in the region to gain a competitive advantage over the United States."


— National Security Adviser John Bolton

iDeas Lab


CSIS's new video series "What's Happening?" takes a dive into the intricacies of specific countries, conflicts and world events. Check out the newest video, "What's Happening with Brexit," featuring Heather Conley.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images). Defense Secretary Jim Mattis arrives to brief House members on Yemen, Saudi Arabia and the murder of Saudi critic Jamal Khashoggi today on Capitol.

Recommended Reading

“Economists See U.S.-China Trade War as Biggest Threat in 2019,” by the WSJ’s Harriet Torry.

This Town Tomorrow

At  10:00 a.m., the Wilson Center will host a panel to discuss a new law introduced in Ukraine to reform the electricity market as part of a nationwide series of reforms.

Later, at  12:30 p.m., the Washington Institute will host Reza Pahlavi, son of the late Muhammad Reza Shah Pahlavi, to discuss the future of the Iranian government and the prospects for liberal democracy down the road.

And at   1:30 p.m.   the Wilson Center will hold an event to explore citizen science and crowdsourcing projects with leaders in government, academia, nongovernmental organizations, and the private sector.

Video

The escalating conflict in Yemen has created the worst humanitarian crisis in the world. Today, CSIS hosted a conversation with Senator Todd Young (R-IN) and David Beasley, Executive Director of the World Food Programme, to discuss the policy solutions and action needed to improve the humanitarian situation in Yemen. Watch the full event  here.

Podcasts


Trade experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch break down the buzz around trade, how it affects policy, and how it impacts your day-to-day. The Trade Guys is hosted every week by H. Andrew Schwartz.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

My vote for the greatest live album of all time is the Allman Brothers’ “Live at the Fillmore East.” To me, nothing is really close. Sure, you can talk about James Brown “Live at the Apollo” or the Rolling Stones’ “Get Your Ya Ya’s Out” or the Who’s “Live at Leeds.” And of course there is “The Last Waltz.” We already discussed the Dead. I could also go on and on about Lynyrd Skynyrd’s “One More From The Road” or Hendrix’s “Live at Monterrey.”

But “Fillmore East,” is a cut above. The late, great Jerry Wexler (Aretha’s producer) once told me, “Kid, it’s all about Jazz and Southern Rock for me.” Jerry nailed it. And the Allman Brothers “Live at the Filmore East” is as pure a fusion of Jazz and Southern Rock as has ever existed.

This clip is the Allman’s performing live at the Fillmore East in 1970 for a PBS taped special. The recording of the album “Filmore East” actually happened a year later. But watch, and listen. You’ll get the picture.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      