
        The Evening: Huawei Arrest, Arms Treaty, Nine Tonight and More
December 6, 2018Good Evening,

It's Thursday, December 6th.

Huawei Arrest

China demanded the release of a senior executive at tech giant Huawei Technologies after she was detained in Canada on extradition charges to the U.S, as NBC News  reports.

And, as the WSJ’s Lingling Wei and Eva Dou  report, the arrest intensifies the confrontation in the already divisive China-U.S. negotiations on trade.

Dive Deeper: “How 5G Will Shape Innovation and Security,” by CSIS’s James Andrew Lewis.

“The New Old Threat of Chinese Industrial Cyber Espionage,” by CFR’s Adam Segal.

Arms Treaty

Russia must scrap its 9M729 nuclear-capable cruise missiles and launchers or modify the weapons’ range to return to compliance with a key Cold War-era arms control treaty and avert a U.S. pullout from the pact, a senior U.S. official said today, as Reuters’ Jonathan Landay and Arshad Mohammed  report.

Dive Deeper: Explore Russia’s missile by visiting CSIS’s micro-website, “Missile Threat.”

Oil Prices Tumble

Oil prices fell as much as 5 percent today after Saudi Arabia’s energy minister exited a fractious Opec meeting saying he was “not confident” a deal to cut crude production could be achieved between the cartel and its allies, as the FT’s Anjli Raval and David Sheppard  report.

Rollback of Sage Grouse Protections

The Trump administration today published documents detailing its plan to roll back Obama-era protections for the vast habitat of the greater sage grouse, a chicken-like bird that roams across nearly 11 million acres in 10 oil-rich Western states, as the New York Times’ Coral Davenport  reports.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


CSIS’s Trade Guys  Crash Course

Now enrolling for CSIS Crash Course, a one-day seminar on the fundamentals of U.S. international trade policy and politics for trade professionals. This program will be conducted by CSIS experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch, known as the Trade Guys from their highly-rated weekly podcast. Information  here.



In That Number

75

Last week, the U.S. became a net oil Exporter for the first time in 75 years.

Source:  Bloomberg 

Critical Quote


“Huawei is one company we’ve been concerned about. There are others as well. I think this is going to be a major subject of the negotiations that President Trump and President Xi Jinping agreed to in Buenos Aires.”


— National Security Advisor John Bolton

iDeas Lab

 
This graphic illustrates whether a Chinese auto tariff reduction would impact U.S. exports. President Trump claimed China agreed to drop its 40% tariff on U.S. car imports, but U.S. cars won't significantly impact the $375 billion trade deficit the U.S. had with China in 2017. Find more Trade Guys graphics on their  microsite.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: David J. Phillip-Pool/Getty Images). Former President George W. Bush embraces former Secretary of State James Baker during the funeral for former President George H.W. Bush today at St. Martin's Episcopal Church in Houston.

Recommended Reading

"Debating Japan: Japan-China Rapprochement Will Fail," by CSIS's Japan Chair.

This Town Tomorrow

At  10:30 a.m., The Center for a New American Security will feature a keynote address by Senator Mark R. Warner (D-VA) on the need for a U.S. cyber doctrine in the face of growing threats from traditional cyber attacks and information operations.

And at  12:15 p.m., the Peterson Institute for International Economics will host Lael Brainard, member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, to present her insights on current financial stability.

Video

Today, CSIS hosted a Maritime Security Dialogue, featuring a conversation with the Honorable Richard V. Spencer, 76th Secretary of the Navy. He discussed the state of the Navy and Marine Corps and innovation in the naval domain. Watch the full event  here.

Podcasts


Trade experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch break down the buzz around trade, how it affects policy, and how it impacts your day-to-day. The Trade Guys is hosted every week by H. Andrew Schwartz

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

Some musicians just sound better live. Next week we’ll talk more about some of those artists but for now let’s discuss the great Bob Seger.

“Nine Tonight,” Seger’s masterful live record contains the best versions of classics like “Rock and Roll Never Forgets,” “Main Street” and maybe most of all “Hollywood Nights.”

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      