
        Bad Idea: Ignoring the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
December 7, 2018The Treaty on Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW), colloquially known as the “Ban Treaty,” is hailed by supporters as the beginning of the end for nuclear weapons. Proponents of the treaty recognize that it will not immediately force nuclear weapons states to disarm; instead, they hope that the treaty will delegitimize nuclear weapons and contribute to the creation of international norms against their possession. The nuclear weapons states, including the United States, vehemently disagree with this proposition, and have criticized the treaty on its shortcomings as a legal instrument for disarmament. Beyond this criticism, the United States has done little to engage with the Ban Treaty or its supporters. But ignoring the Ban Treaty is a bad idea that will exacerbate the divide between nuclear and non-nuclear states and could lead to a dangerously uneven pace of international disarmament.

The TPNW was born out of frustration with the disarmament regime created by the  Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty  (NPT). The NPT rests upon a bargain between recognized nuclear states (the United States, Russia, China, France and the United Kingdom) and non-nuclear states. The non-nuclear states agreed to forgo the pursuit of nuclear weapons, while the nuclear weapons states agreed to work in good faith toward disarmament. In recent years, however, some non-nuclear weapons states have become increasingly frustrated by what they perceive as a lack of effort by nuclear weapons states to fulfill their end of the bargain. This frustration was further expounded when the 2015 NPT Review Conference failed to produce a consensus statement outlining future steps on disarmament. Although it is not  unusual  for NPT Review Conferences to end without consensus, civil society groups and non-nuclear states had  high hopes  that the 2015 conference would produce significant progress.
 



This piece was published as part of the Defense360 

Read More Here





​Bernadette Stadler is a program coordinator and research assistant for the Project on Nuclear Issues (PONI) in the International Security Program at CSIS. Suzanne Claeys is a program coordinator and research assistant for the Project on Nuclear Issues (PONI) in the International Security Program at CSIS.      