
        The Evening: Turkey, Yemen, Werewolves of London and More
October 31, 2018Good Evening,

It's Wednesday, October 31st.

Turkey's Account

Turkey has given its first official statement on how it believes Saudi writer Jamal Khashoggi was killed, saying he was immediately strangled, as the BBC  reports.

Dive Deeper : “What’s at Stake for Erdogan in the Khashoggi Affair?” by the Middle East Institute’s Gönül Tol.

“U.S. Must Impose a Price on Saudis, But One With a Clear Purpose,” by the Washington Institute’s Dennis Ross.

U.S. and Britain Seek Yemen Cease-fire

Diplomatic pressure from the United States and Britain, Saudi Arabia’s biggest arms suppliers, abruptly intensified for a cease-fire in the Yemen war, as the New York Times’ Gardiner Harris and Rick Gladstone  report.

Dive Deeper : “Yemen Matters,” by CSIS’s Jon Alterman.

U.S. Sanctions on Russia

Russia’s drive to fill state coffers to give itself a $200 billion buffer against threats like new U.S. sanctions is prudent, analysts say, but will come at the expense of economic growth, as Reuters’ Darya Korsunskaya  reports.

Dive Deeper : “Critical Questions: U.S. Sanctions against Russia: What You Need to Know,” by CSIS’s Cyrus Newlin and Jeffrey Mankoff.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

8

The U.S. fell two spots, dropping to eighth place, in the World Bank’s annual ranking of the world’s economies for their ease of doing business.

Source:  WSJ 

Critical Quote


“We…request that you suspend any related negotiations for a U.S.-Saudi civil nuclear agreement for the foreseeable future.”


— U.S. Senators Marco Rubio (R-FL), Cory Gardner (R-CO), Rand Paul (R-KY), Dean Heller (R-NV) and Todd Young (R-IN) in a letter to President Trump.

iDeas Lab

 
The automation of processes and procedures with cutting-edge technologies, such as advanced robotics and artificial intelligence (AI), has the potential to fundamentally change the global economy. As China looks to sustain economic growth, how it harnesses automation will be crucial to its long-term economic competitiveness. CSIS's ChinaPower has launched a new feature on  China’s readiness for intelligent automation.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images). South Korean Minister of National Defense Jeong Kyeongdoo today at the Pentagon.

Recommended Reading

“The Protection of Civilians in U.S. Partnered Operations,” by CSIS’s Melissa Dalton, Daniel Mahanty, Hijab Shah and Julie Snyder.

This Town Tomorrow

At  2:00 p.m., the CSIS Scholl Chair will review how blockchain can be used to solve complex business problems across various sectors and areas of life, and discuss what the U.S. government’s policy should be regarding blockchain.

And at  4:00 p.m.  The Wilson Center will hold the U.S. premiere of the film “The Right to Memory,” as well as a discussion of one of Russia's most distinguished public intellectuals, Arseny Roginsky.

Video

Today, CSIS convened a panel of experts to discuss how the U.S. can leverage enterprise funds to supplement existing development tools. The event corresponds with the launch of a new CSIS report,   Time for a Third Wave of Enterprise Funds. Watch the full discussion  here.

Podcasts


The Readout dissects the big (and soon-to-be big) stories of the week in U.S. foreign policy and international affairs. The show posts every Friday and features guests from the policy community and the media, as well as CSIS's in-house experts. Hosted by Colm Quinn.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

Everyone has their favorite Halloween song(s), and we can debate the best of them. Michael Jackson’s “Thriller” certainly would top most lists. Then there’s Screamin’ Jay Hawkins’ “I Put A Spell On You,” and CCR’s “Bad Moon Rising” to name a few others.

But hands down, my all-time favorite Halloween song is the incomparable Warren Zevon’s “Werewolves of London.”

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      