
        The Evening:  Yemen, Stocks Surge, Growing Up and More
November 28, 2018Good Evening,

It's Wednesday, November 28th.

Defending Saudis, Trump Officials Warn Senators Not to Abandon Yemen War

Trump administration officials urged senators against withdrawing American military support for the war in Yemen in an aggressive warning today that doing so could embolden Iran and endanger the United States, as the NYT ’s Gardiner Harris, Eric Schmitt, Helene Cooper and Nicholas Fandos  report.

Dive Deeper : “The Inconvenient Truth About Saudi Arabia,” by CFR’s Richard Haass.

Sea Clash

Russia’s Vladimir Putin has accused Ukraine's leader, Petro Poroshenko, of trying to boost his ratings ahead of 2019 elections with a naval confrontation off Crimea, as the BBC  report.

Stock Surge

The Dow Jones Industrial Average surged more than 600 points today, erasing its November decline, after Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell eased investor worries about an aggressive increase in interest rates, as the WSJ’s Amrith Ramkumar  reports.
 

U.S.-China Tensions Ahead of G20

President Donald Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping are expected to meet on the sidelines of the G20 summit in Argentina this week for what some see as the most important meeting in years between the leaders of the world’s two largest economies, as Reuters’ David Brunnstrom and Matt Spetalnick  report.

Dive Deeper : “Preview of the G20 Summit,” briefing by CSIS experts.

“Critical Questions: Vice President Pence in Asia: Economic Outcomes,” by CSIS’s Matthew Goodman.

Plus, the latest episode of the CSIS podcast, “The Trade Guys” which previews the meeting between President Trump and China's Xi Jinping at the upcoming G20 summit.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.


In That Number

45

The Trump administration is expected to extend the military mission along the U.S. border with Mexico at 45 days beyond its scheduled end date of December 15.

Source:   Washington Post  

Critical Quote


“I just want our country to be treated fairly.”


— President Donald Trump

iDeas Lab

 
Since gaining its independence from Sudan in 2011, South Sudan has struggled to fulfill the promise of a new nation, eventually descending into civil war in late 2013. A new  CSIS brief  outlines the array of humanitarian access constraints aid organizations are dealing with in South Sudan.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images). Secretary of State Mike Pompeo after defending America's increasingly contentious support for Saudi Arabia's war in Yemen, warning lawmakers the brutal conflict would worsen without U.S. involvement.

Recommended Reading

"Beyond the Radar Archipelago: A New Roadmap for Missile Defense Sensors," by CSIS's Tom Karako for War on the Rocks.

This Town Tomorrow

At  8:15 a.m., CSIS will host leading experts from both China and the U.S. to debate core issues underpinning the nature of Chinese power.

Later, at  3:00 p.m., The Hudson Institute will hold a discussion with Foreign Policy Magazine’s Ravi Agrawal on his recent book, “India Connected: How the Smartphone is Transforming the World’s Largest Democracy.”

And at  3:15 p.m., The Inter-American Dialogue will have a conversation with high-level officials on the achievements, challenges, and path ahead for the energy sector in Mexico.

Video

Nearly 50 countries chose not to recognize the results of the most recent Venezuelan elections, opening the door to the uncertain future of Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro's legitimacy. Today, CSIS convened a panel of experts to discuss what the future holds for Venezuela and how the international community should respond to this uncertainty. Watch the full discussion  here.

Podcasts


Into Africa, CSIS's latest podcast, shatters the narratives that dominate U.S. perceptions of Africa. Host Judd Devermont, CSIS's Africa program director, sits down with policymakers, journalists, academics and other trailblazers in African affairs to shine a spotlight on the faces spearheading cultural, political, and economic change on the continent.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

“When they said sit down I stood up.”

This week I had the pleasure of having lunch with a fellow Bruce Springsteen aficionado, Rolling Stone Magazine’s Washington bureau chief, Andy Kroll. So of course, in addition to talking policy, we discussed The Boss.

Then, my buddy Tanzania Tom sent me the extraordinary Esquire Magazine cover story published yesterday, “Beneath the Surface of Bruce Springsteen,” by Michael Hainey. I strongly recommend it.

There is a short list of musicians that transcend music: Dylan, Aretha, Springsteen, Madonna, James Brown, John Lennon and Lou Reed to name a few.

Songs like Bruce’s “Growing Up,” underscore their transcendence.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      