
        The Evening:  Khashoggi Case, Global Trade Winds, Learning To Fly and More
October 17, 2018Good Evening,

It's Wednesday, October 17th.

Khashoggi Case

Saudi Arabia allowed Turkish officials investigating the suspected killing of a dissident Saudi journalist to search the residence of their top diplomat in Istanbul, and President Trump today countered suggestions he was protecting the kingdom to preserve vital business and security ties, as the WSJ’s David Gauthier-Villars and Rebecca Ballhaus  report.

Dive Deeper: “The Other Side of the Khashoggi Tragedy,” by CSIS’s Anthony Cordesman.

“Jamal Khashoggi’s Disappearance Is Even Stranger Than It Seems,” by CFR’s Steven Cook.

Global Trade

A fragile trade peace between the US and EU was at risk of collapse today after the Trump administration and European Commission accused each other of undermining a White House deal reached in July, as the FT ’s Jim Brunsden  reports.

Diver Deeper: Listen to the latest episode of the Trade Guys podcast, “Fueling the Economy.”

Guatemala Rejects Conditions

Guatemalan President Jimmy Morales today his government rejects “conditions” placed on foreign aid, after threats this week from President Trump to cut assistance if a Central American migrant caravan is not stopped by local authorities, as Reuters  reports.

And, as Reuters  reports, more Honduran migrants tried to join a caravan of several thousand trekking through Guatemala today, defying calls by authorities not to make the journey after President Trump threatened to cut off regional aid in reprisal.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

5%

President Trump today asked his cabinet members to find ways to cut their department budgets by 5% next year.

Source:   WSJ  

Critical Quote


"I'm not giving cover at all…I just want to find out what's happening."


— President Donald Trump on the suspected killing of journalist Jamal Khashoggi.

iDeas Lab


On September 24th, China imposed a 10% tariff on U.S. Liquified Natural Gas (LNG) in response to the Trump administration's tariffs on Chinese goods. CSIS's Trade Guys discuss this topic on their latest podcast episode, listen  here.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Leah Millis/AFP/Getty Images). Secretary of State Mike Pompeo speaks to reporters today while his plane refuels in Brussels.

Recommended Reading

“The Nobel Committee Shines a Spotlight on Rape in Conflict,” via The Economist.

This Town Tomorrow

Tonight at  6:30 p.m., the Council on Foreign Relations will host Doris Kearns Goodwin and Jay Wink for a discussion on "Presidential Leadership" and the definitive qualities that presidents throughout history have exemplified to overcome adversity.

At  10:30 a.m., the CSIS Southeast Asia Program will host Clive Hamilton for the release of his new book, “Silent Invasion: China's Influence in Australia.”

Later, at  4:00 p.m., join CSIS and “Betraying Big Brother: The Feminist Awakening in China” author Leta Hong Fincher for a discussion on China’s feminist movement and the unique challenge it poses to China’s authoritarian regime.

Video

Today’s CSIS-Pertamina Banyan Tree Leadership Forum hosted a conversation with Vice President Maria Leonor Gerona Robredo of the Philippines. Vice President Leni Robredo discussed the importance of upholding accountability and the rule of law in the quest for democracy and community development in the 21st century. Watch the full event  here.

Podcasts


Trade experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch break down the buzz around trade, how it affects policy, and how it impacts your day-to-day. Check out the latest episode on Japan following the EU's playbook by agreeing to bilateral trade talks with the U.S.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

An artist that I’m paying some attention to these days is Kurt Vile, a musician from Philadelphia who is probably best known as part of the Grammy winning band called The War on Drugs, and from his 2017 collaboration with Aussie singer Courtney Barnett on the critically acclaimed album “Lotta Sea Lice.”

Vile has a cool new record out, “Bottle It In,” that draws substantially on country music and psychedelic folk rock influences. He’s out promoting the album and visited the Sirius XM studios to play a few live tunes. The song that got me wasn’t one of his new originals though. It’s a cover of Tom Petty’s “Learning To Fly,” performed with a country twang and some beautiful acoustic guitar playing by Vile. Petty may be gone, but his music will never die. And that makes me smile.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      