
        The Evening:  Erdogan, INF, Deal and More
October 23, 2018Good Evening,

It's Tuesday, October 23rd.

Erdogan on Khashoggi

Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdogan vowed to identify any high-ranking Saudi officials who ordered the killing of journalist Jamal Khashoggi, as the kingdom’s powerful crown prince attended an investment conference that opened under a cloud cast by the crisis, as the Wall Street Journal ’s David Gauthier-Villars and Margherita Stancati  report.

And as the Journal also  reports, President Trump said that the “coverup was one of the worst in the history of coverups.”

Plus, as Politico  reports, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said today that the U.S. will revoke visas of some of the Saudi officials allegedly responsible for the death of Washington Post columnist Jamal Khashoggi.

Dive Deeper : “The Khashoggi Tragedy and U.S. Strategic Interests in the Gulf: Finding the Right Solution,” by CSIS’s Anthony Cordesman.

“What Does Khashoggi’s Murder Tell Us About the Saudi Power Structure?” by the Washington Institute’s Simon Henderson.

INF Treaty

In Moscow today, national security adviser John Bolton held firm to President Trump’s announcement that the United States would withdraw from the landmark INF Treaty, as the Washington Post’s Anton Troianovski  reports.

Dive Deeper : “Rising Nuclear Dangers: New Survey Highlights Diverging Views of Strategic Stability between Russia and the West,” via the Nuclear Threat Initiative.

“Statement from Ernest J. Moniz and Sam Nunn On U.S. Withdrawal from the INF Treaty,” via the Nuclear Threat Initiative.

“The Uncertain Future of the INF Treaty,” by CFR’s Ankit Panda.

“Trump Trashes Another Treaty,” by CFR’s Stephen Sestanovich.

U.S. Warships Passing Through

The United States sent two warships through the Taiwan Strait on Monday in the second such operation this year, as the U.S. military increases the frequency of transits through the strategic waterway despite opposition from China, as Reuters’ Yimou Lee, Idrees Ali and Phil Stewart  report.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

$375 Billion

The U.S. goods trade deficit with China grew from $83 billion in 2001 to $375.2 billion in 2017.

Source:  U.S. Census Bureau 

Critical Quote


“We have strong evidence that this murder was planned.”


— Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdogan

iDeas Lab


A concerted attempt by the international community to force Maduro from office by challenging his legitimacy may help Venezuelans get their country back, as Moises Rendon, Associate Director and Associate Fellow of the CSIS Americas Program, writes in a new commentary, "Venezuela's Presidency in Jeopardy."

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics

 
(Photo credit: Getty Images). Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan speaks about the murder of Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi during his weekly parliamentary address today in Ankara.

Recommended Reading

“The Right Way to Protect America’s Innovation Advantage: Getting Smart About the Chinese Threat,” by CFR’s Lorand Laskai and CSIS’s Samm Sacks for Foreign Affairs.

This Town Tomorrow

At  1:30 p.m. the CSIS Africa Program will hold “The Future of AMISOM,” a panel discussion addressing the evolution, challenges, and future of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

Later, at  4:00 p.m., CSIS will host Stewart Paterson, author of “China, Trade and Power,” for a discussion of the challenges China poses for the international trading system.

And at  9:00 a.m.  The Hudson Institute and Freedom House’s "Mark Palmer Forum for the Advancement of Democracy" will have a conference on China’s global challenge to democratic freedom.

Video

Over the past twenty years, Indonesia has undergone an extraordinary transformation – from authoritarianism to democracy, from economic crisis to one of the world’s most important emerging economies. Today, CSIS hosted an expert panel to review Indonesia’s path since the reformasi (reform) era, Indonesia’s relationship with the United States, and Indonesia’s future trajectory. Watch the full event  here.

Podcasts


The Readout dissects the big (and soon-to-be big) stories of the week in U.S. foreign policy and international affairs. The show posts every Friday and features guests from the policy community and the media, as well as CSIS's in-house experts.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

One of the greatest concerts ever was undoubtedly the Grateful Dead at Gizah Sound & Light Theater in Cairo, Egypt, on September 16, 1978. Obviously, The Dead realized their would be an energy in the Giza pyramid complex and they knew they could tap into it. It was an extraordinary scene to be sure as the band’s road crew set up their gear at the open-air theater on the east side of the Great Sphinx, for three nights of concerts. The final night's performance concurred with a total lunar eclipse.  This clip  is taken from that evening.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      