
        The Evening: Election Security, European Army, Amazing Grace and More
November 6, 2018Good Evening,

It's Tuesday, November 6th.

Election Security

Russian agents believed to be connected to the government have been active in spreading divisive content and promoting extreme themes ahead of Tuesday’s U.S. mid-term elections, but they are working hard to cover their tracks, according to government investigators, academics and security firms, as Reuters’ Joe Menn  reports.

And as the Wall Street Journal’s Dustin Volz  reports, U.S. security officials said early today that they had observed nothing significant involving cyberattacks on election infrastructure as voters headed to the polls, but they cautioned that the situation could change quickly throughout the day.

Dive Deeper:  Visit CSIS’s interactive “Russia Sanctions Tracker.”

European Army

French President Emmanuel Macron called for the creation of a “true European army,” issuing a sharp critique of trans-Atlantic security ties days before U.S. President Trump is due to visit France, as the WSJ’s Stacy Meichtry and Laurence Norman  report.

Dive Deeper:  “Northern Europe’s Strategic Challenge from Russia: What Political and Military Responses?” by the French Institute of International Relations’ Barbara Kunz.

U.S.-China Thaw

The United States and China will hold a delayed top-level security dialogue on Friday, the latest sign of a thaw in relations, as China’s vice president said Beijing was willing to talk with Washington to resolve their bitter trade dispute, as Reuters’ David Brunnstrom and John Geddie  report.

Dive Deeper:  “Responding to Chinese Espionage,” by CSIS’s James Andrew Lewis.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

5,000

By Election Day morning, more than 5,000 U.S. troops were to be deployed in three states, Texas, Arizona and California.

Source:   WSJ  

Critical Quote


"We have to protect ourselves with respect to China, Russia and even the United States of America."


— French President Emmanuel Macron

iDeas Lab


CSIS’s Stephen Morrison and Judd Devermonet published a new report,   North Kivu’s Ebola Outbreak at Day 90: What Is to Be Done?   on how to affirm U.S. leadership in eastern Congo.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Mario Tama/Getty Images). Voters prepare to cast their ballots in the midterm elections at a polling place on November 6, 2018 in Los Angeles, U.S.

Recommended Reading

"Don't Dumb Down This US Army Radar," by CSIS's Tom Karako in Defense News.

This Town Tomorrow

At  2:30 p.m., CSIS will hold a public panel discussion with Ambassador Rick Olson on how the U.S. can make the most of its Foreign Assistance Review.

And, at  1:00 p.m., The Hudson Institute will host Emily Haber, Ambassador of Germany to the United States, for a discussion about the current state of U.S.-German relations.

Video

Today, CSIS hosted Federica Saliola, Co-Director of the World Development Report, for a presentation on the World Bank’s 2019 World Development Report. Saliola then joined a panel of experts to discuss the changing nature of work and development in the world, especially those changes brought about by the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Watch the full event  here.

Podcasts


North Korea is the Impossible State. Each week join the people who know the most about North Korea—The Center for Strategic and International Studies’ Victor Cha, Mike Green, and Sue Mi Terry—for an insiders discussion with host H. Andrew Schwartz about the United States’ top national security priority.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

This is an exciting smile. In just six days from now, a long-awaited concert film about the making of Aretha Franklin’s transcendent gospel record, “Amazing Grace,” is set for release.

Directed by the late Sydney Pollack, the film “Amazing Grace” was shot over two nights in 1972 at the New Temple Missionary Baptist Church in Watts, Los Angeles. It captures Aretha Franklin performing and recording an album that would become the best-selling gospel record of all time. For a variety of technical and business reasons the project never made it to the screen. Now, 46 years after it was filmed, we have the opportunity to see something truly remarkable. I can honestly say that this trailer for “Amazing Grace,” left me speechless as I’ve never seen anything like it (and yes, if you look closely enough you will also see Mick Jagger dancing in the church).

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      