
        The Evening: Khashoggi Update, EU Migrant Crisis, White Album and More
October 18, 2018Good Evening,

It's Thursday, October 18th.

Trump Believes Khashoggi Dead

President Trump said today that he believes the Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi is dead, and he expressed confidence in intelligence reports from multiple sources that strongly suggest a high-level Saudi role in Mr. Khashoggi’s assassination but stopped short of saying the Saudi crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, was responsible, as the New York Times’ Maggie Haberman, Mark Landler and Michael Schmidt  report.

Dive Deeper : “How Is the Saudi Public Likely Responding to the Crisis over Khashoggi’s Disappearance? The Popularity of Riyadh’s ‘Reformist Repression,’” by the Washington Institute’s David Pollock.

Taliban Attack

One of southern Afghanistan’s most powerful anti-Taliban leaders, Gen. Abdul Raziq was assassinated today and the top U.S. commander in the country escaped unharmed when a bodyguard for the governor of southern Kandahar province opened fire following a meeting to discuss security preparations for this weekend’s parliamentary elections, as the Wall Street Journal ’s Craig Nelson and Ehsanullah Amiri  reports.

Dive Deeper : “America's Failed State Wars in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, and Yemen: Still Less Than Half a Strategy,” by CSIS’s Anthony Cordesman.

European Migration

European Union leaders agreed today to pursue the cooperation of countries in North Africa and to beef up the bloc's external borders to stop large numbers of migrants from entering Europe, as the AP’s Lorne Cook  reports.

Dive Deeper : “Crossing Borders: How the Migration Crisis Transformed Europe’s External Policy,” by CSIS’s Heather Conley and Donatienne Ruy.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

10 Million

While the worldwide rate of new Tuberculosis (TB) infections (incidence rate) continues to fall by about 2 percent per year, there were still an estimated 10 million new cases of TB in 2017.

Source:  CSIS 

Critical Quote


“Unless the miracle of all miracles happens, I would acknowledge that he’s dead.”


— President Trump on Jamal Khashoggi

iDeas Lab


Between 2014 and 2017, Europe saw its largest influx of migrants in decades, with nearly 2 millions arrivals to the continent, and 3.6 million first-time asylum applicants across the 28 European Union states. CSIS's Europe Program unravels the crisis of resources and politics that has ensued since in their new report,  Crossing Borders.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images). Secretary of State Mike Pompeo speaks to the press about his trip to Saudi Arabia after meeting with President Trump today at the White House.

Recommended Reading

“What the Arab World Needs Most is Free Expression,” by Washington Post Global Opinions contributing columnist Jamal Khashoggi.

This Town Tomorrow

At  9:00 a.m., CSIS will hold a discussion, which will also serve as the launch of a new report, on the future of work in developing economies.

And later, at  10:00 a.m., the Wilson Center's Science and Technology Innovation Program will host a panel to speak on the role of local and state governments in preparing for cyber conflict.

Video

Today CSIS hosted Clive Hamilton, author of  Silent Invasion: China's Influence in Australia. Along with experts Bonnie Glaser and Amy Searight, the panel discussed China’s growing overseas influence and its implications for the future. Watch the full event  here.

Podcasts


Trade experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch break down the buzz around trade, how it affects policy, and how it impacts your day-to-day. Check out the latest episode on Japan following the EU's playbook by agreeing to bilateral trade talks with the U.S.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

Every so often, a rock and roll gem is unearthed. Today is one of those days.

As Rolling Stone magazine reports, we are now able to learn a little bit more about The Beatles’ “White Album,” a revolutionary recording which as Rolling Stone puts it, “has been blowing minds since 1968.” On November 9th, a new “Super Deluxe Edition” of the album will be available which will include a trove of previously unreleased material. Rolling Stone today premiered the first track available from this set, a previously unheard version of the classic George Harrison song, “While My Guitar Gently Weeps.” Enjoy.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      