
        The Evening:  Canceled on Putin, Ukraine asks for NATO Help, Badlands and More
November 29, 2018Good Evening,

It's Thursday, November 29th.

Canceled on Putin

President Trump today abruptly canceled his planned meeting with Vladimir Putin at the G20 Summit in Buenos Aires citing the unresolved naval standoff between Russia and Ukraine, as the NYT’s Peter Baker  reports.

Dive Deeper:  “Key global views about issues and leaders in the spotlight at the G20 summit,” by the Pew Research Center’s Richard Wike and Moira Fagan.

“The G20 Tango: What to Expect From the Buenos Aires Summit,” by CFR’s Stewart Patrick.

CSIS Press Briefing Transcript: “Preview of the G20 Summit.”

Ukraine Asks for NATO Help

Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko accused Russia’s Vladimir Putin today of wanting to annex his entire country and called for NATO to deploy warships to a sea shared by the two nations, as Reuters Thomas Escritt and Andrew Osborn  report.

Dive Deeper:  Via the Chicago Council on Global Affairs “#AskIvo: Why Is Putin Moving Against Ukraine?” with Ivo Daalder.

Trade Deal

The U.S. and China, looking to defuse tensions and boost markets, are exploring a trade deal in which Washington would hold off on further tariffs through the spring in exchange for new talks looking at big changes in Chinese economic policy, as the WSJ ’s Bob Davis and Lingling Wei  report.

Dive Deeper: See the new  CSIS Trade Guys  podcast which previews the highly anticipated meeting between President Trump and China's Xi Jinping at the upcoming G20 summit.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

426

The Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo is now the second largest in history, according to figures from the World Health Organization. Since the outbreak was declared Aug. 1, 426 people are suspected or confirmed to have been infected with the deadly hemorrhagic virus, which has killed at least 242.

Source:  WHO 

Critical Quote


"I have no time for equivocation. Antisemitism is racism - and any 'equality' movement that indulges or ignores it is not worthy of the name."


— British PM Theresa May

iDeas Lab


Check out CSIS's new video series: "What's Happening?" The newest video, "What's Happening in Idlib, Syria," dives into the brutal intricacies of the Syrian Civil War.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Win McNamee/Getty Images). President Trump answers questions from the press today at the White House.

Recommended Reading

“Europe’s Jew Hatred, and Ours,” by the NYT’s Bari Weiss.

This Town Tomorrow

At  9:00 a.m., CSIS will gather U.S. development agencies and policymakers with democratic leaders from Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela to share diverse and bipartisan views on how we can move towards a hemisphere of freedom.

Later, at  12:00 p.m., The Hudson Institute will host a discussion on election interference in NATO countries.

And at  3:00 p.m.  The Wilson Center will host Russian writer Lyudmila Ulitskaya to discuss the role of the intelligentsia in contemporary Russian society.

Video

Today, CSIS hosted the third annual ChinaPower Conference, featuring leading experts from both China and the U.S. to debate core issues underpinning the nature of Chinese power. Watch the full conference  here.

Podcasts


Into Africa, CSIS's latest podcast, shatters the narratives that dominate U.S. perceptions of Africa. Host Judd Devermont, CSIS's Africa program director, sits down with policymakers, journalists, academics and other trailblazers in African affairs to shine a spotlight on the faces spearheading cultural, political, and economic change on the continent.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

Thanks to all for the many notes I received about  The Boss. There’s really no one like him.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      