
        The Evening: Election Security, Iran Sanctions, Truckin’ and More
October 30, 2018Good Evening,

It's Tuesday, October 30th.

Election Security

States have stepped up their cybersecurity protections ahead of the Nov. 6 midterms, but are still lacking in some areas, according to a report released today by CSIS, as The Hill’s Jacqueline Thomsen  reports.

Dive Deeper: “CSIS Election Cybersecurity Scorecard: The Outlook for 2018, 2020 and Beyond,” by CSIS’s William Carter.

Iran Sanctions

U.S. sanctions against Iran will have “severe consequences” for the world order, the Islamic republic said today, days before new sanctions on Tehran’s oil exports take effect, as Reuters’  reports.

Meanwhile, as the FT’s Richard Milne  reports, Iranian intelligence planned an assassination attack in Denmark that was foiled in September, according to Danish security services.

Dive Deeper:  “Iran’s ‘Resistance’ Bloc Rises amid New U.S. Sanctions,” by the Washington Institute’s Mehdi Khalaji.

Trade War

The U.S. is preparing to announce by early December tariffs on all remaining Chinese imports if talks next month between presidents Donald Trump and Xi Jinping fail to ease the trade war, as Bloomberg’s Jenny Leonard and Jennifer Jacobs  report.

Dive Deeper: “Services, Services,” by CSIS’s Bill Reinsch.

“What is Globalization: And How Has the Global Economy Shaped the United States?” via the Peterson Institute.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

$75 million

40 states have invested more than $75 million in state and federal funds since 2016 to help secure their election systems.

Source: “CSIS Election Cybersecurity Scorecard: The Outlook for 2018, 2020 and Beyond.”

Critical Quote


“We're the only country in the world where a person comes in and has a baby, and the baby is essentially a citizen of the United States ... with all of those benefits… It's ridiculous. It's ridiculous. And it has to end."


— President Donald Trump

iDeas Lab


Today, CSIS released the "CSIS Election Cybersecurity Scorecard: The Outlook for 2018, 2020 and Beyond." Check out this new report  here.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Christian Marquardt - Pool/Getty Images). President of the Republic of Rwanda, Chairperson of the African Union Paul Kagame, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and President of the Republic of South Africa Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa attend the G20 Investment Summit today in Berlin.

Recommended Reading

“Explainer: How a Democratic U.S. House could alter foreign policy,” by Reuters’ Patricia Zengerle.

This Town Tomorrow

At  9:30 a.m., join CSIS for a discussion on leveraging enterprise funds to stimulate economic development by investing in the private sectors of developing countries.

And at  10:00 a.m.  The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace will host a conversation on the ways in which money flows through the political arteries of India’s democracy.

Video

Today, CSIS hosted a panel to discuss the progress made and ongoing efforts to secure elections systems since the 2016 election, evaluate what gaps and vulnerabilities still remain, and what steps can be taken in preparation for the upcoming midterm elections and 2020 presidential election. Watch the full discussion  here.

Podcasts


Hosted by Bonnie S. Glaser, the ChinaPower Podcast dissects critical issues underpinning China’s emergence as a global power.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

Just keep Truckin’ on.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      