
        The Evening: Russians Indicted, Pence on China, Straight Into Darkness and More
October 4, 2018Good Evening,

It's Thursday, October 4th.

Note: The Evening will be “gone fishin’” on Monday, October 8.

Russian Cyber Attacks

Russian intelligence officers brazenly launched cyberattacks on investigators pursuing Russian malfeasance around the globe, Western officials said on Thursday, offering a litany of victims including antidoping agencies, inspectors scrutinizing the poisoning of a former spy in Britain and others examining the downing of a passenger jet in 2014, as the New York Times’ Eileen Sullivan, Charlie Savage and David D. Kirkpatrick  report.

Dive Deeper: See CFR’s “Cyber Operations Tracker.”

Russian Violation of Arms Treaty

Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said today that Russia’s violation of an arms control treaty was “untenable” and unless it changed course the United States would respond, as Reuters’ Idrees Ali and Robin Emmott  report.

Dive Deeper: “Reducing the Risks of Nuclear Entanglement,” by Carnegie’s James Acton, Tong Zhao and Li Bin.

Pence On China

Vice President Mike Pence speaking today at the Hudson Institute accused China of trying to undermine President Donald Trump through a variety of tactics, including targeted tariffs on Trump supporters and well-placed propaganda meant to exploit "wedge issues," as Politico’s Rebecca Morin  reports.

Dive Deeper:  “China and the U.S.: Choosing Between the Four “Cs” – Conflict and Containment Versus Competition and Cooperation,” by CSIS’s Anthony Cordesman.

Credit and Credibility: Risks to China’s Economic Resilience, by CSIS’s Scott Kennedy, Daniel Rosen and Logan Wright

Trade Strategy

The Trump administration aims to step up trade talks with other countries, using its new pact with Canada and Mexico as a template to redefine rules on everything from foreign exchange and labor markets to how U.S. partners do business with China, as the Wall Street Journal’s Jacob Schlesinger and Josh Zumbrun  report.

Dive Deeper: Listen to the new Trade Guys episode posted today “Doing the USMCA.”

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

7

Seven Russian military officers have been indicted for a series of alleged cyberattacks the U.S. Justice Department announced today.
Source:  WSJ.

Critical Quote


"We will not be intimidated and we will not stand down."


—Vice President Mike Pence in a warning to China today at the Hudson Institute.

iDeas Lab


This week, The Trade Guys unpack the deal to replace NAFTA:  the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement. What's in it, what does it say about the Trump administration's trade policy, and what's next for the new deal. Check out the new episode on The Trade Guys microsite  here.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Alex Wong/Getty Images.) Assistant U.S. Attorney General for National Security John C. Demers speaks during a news conference to announce criminal charges against seven Russian GRU intelligence officers for their alleged roles in hacking and related influence and disinformation operations.

Recommended Reading

More Important than Ever: Renewing the U.S.-Japan Alliance for the 21st Century, by CSIS’s Mike Green, Matt Goodman, Richard Armitage, Joseph Nye and Victor Cha.

This Town Tomorrow

At  10:00 a.m., join CSIS and the United States Naval Institute (USNI) for a Maritime Security Dialogue Event to discuss U.S. Navy aviation and combat readiness.

Later, at  1:30 p.m., CSIS will host P.W. Singer and Emerson T. Brooking for a book discussion of LikeWar, and the role of social media in shaping in shaping real world conflicts.

And at  9:00 a.m., the Atlantic Council will hold a conversation with Admiral James G. Foggo, III on the role of sea power in deterrence as NATO adapts to new security challenges.

Video

Today, the CSIS Southeast Asia Program hosted Malcolm Turnbull, the 29th Prime Minister of Australia.for a discussion of trade and security in the Indo-Pacific. Watch the full event  here.

Podcasts


The CSIS Americas Program podcast, 35 West, looks at the politics and policies of the 35 countries in the Western Hemisphere.

On this week's podcast, Senator Bill Cassidy (R-LA) talks about his recent trip to Guatemala and Mexico, and discusses U.S. efforts to help fight corruption, strengthen borders, and to go after narcotics traffickers.

Listen on  Apple Podcasts  or  SoundCloud.

Smiles

Thanks for the great emails about Tom Petty and the excellent new collection, “An American Treasure.” One of the things I love best about this set is the alternate versions of classic Petty songs that didn’t make the final cut for his studio albums over the years.

I can’t stop listening to these cuts. Take “Straight Into Darkness,” an alternate version from the 1982 album “Long After Dark,” the band’s fifth album and first with bassist Howie Epstein. To me, this version, which is looser and groovier is better than the one that made the record.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      