
        The Evening: Pittsburgh, Brazil, Scarlet Fire and More
October 29, 2018Good Evening,

It's Monday, October 29th.

Pittsburgh

The man accused of killing 11 congregants in a hate-filled attack on a Pittsburgh synagogue appeared in court for the first time today, as the New York Times’ Campbell Robertson, Sabrina Tavernise and Matthew Haag  report.

Brazil

Jair Bolsonaro, a far-right former Army captain who clinched Brazil’s presidential election by a comfortable margin, won the approval of President Trump and began planning trips to Washington and a conservative ally in Chile, as Reuters’ Ricardo Brito and Rodrigo Viga Gaier  report.

Dive Deeper : “What to Expect From a Bolsonaro Presidency in Brazil,” by Chatham House’s Richard Lapper.

Merkel Steps Down

After nearly two decades at the helm of Germany’s biggest party, Chancellor Angela Merkel will step down as chairwoman of her conservatives in a watershed moment that could quicken the end of her leadership of Europe’s economic powerhouse, as the WSJ’s Bojan Pancevski  reports.

Dive Deeper: “The German Center’s Collapse Brings Merkel Era to a Close,” by Brookings’ Constanze Stelzenmüller.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

5,200

The Defense Department will deploy at least 5,200 active-duty troops to the southern border by the end of this week.

Source:   NYT  

Critical Quote


“This is an invasion of our Country and our Military is waiting for you!”


— President Donald Trump on Twitter

iDeas Lab


Since the launch of Sputnik 1 from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in 1957, 29 spaceports around the world have been used to launch satellites to orbit. A new interactive from the CSIS Aerospace Security Project, "Spaceports of the World," describes the history of global space launch.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Brendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty). Squirrel Hill, Pittsburgh, outside the Tree of Life Synagogue.

Recommended Reading

“Chinese Military Researchers Exploit Western Universities,” by the FT’s Kathrin Hille.

This Town Tomorrow

At  9:00 a.m., CSIS will hold a panel discussion on securing election systems against cyber-attacks ahead of the midterm elections in November and the presidential election in 2020.

Then, at  10:00 a.m., CSIS will host the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) Executive Director Henrietta Fore for a keynote address and armchair discussion.

And at  3:00 p.m., join CSIS for the report launch of “The Protection of Civilians in U.S. Partnered Operations,” a joint initiative between the CSIS International Security Program, the Center for Civilians in Conflict, and InterAction.

Video

This afternoon, CSIS hosted a screening of its new film, "The Gathering Health Storm Inside North Korea." The short documentary explores the bleak health realities of North Korea as part of the larger problem of potential instability on the Korean peninsula. Watch the full documentary  here.

Podcasts

 
Hosted by Bonnie S. Glaser, the ChinaPower Podcast dissects critical issues underpinning China’s emergence as a global power.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

“Once in a while you get shown the light, in the strangest of places if you look at it right.”

On days like these it is hard to smile. The carnage of this past weekend in Pittsburgh is so incredibly sad. This monster entered a place of worship, killed 11 innocent people and said that he “wanted all Jews to die.” It reminds me of the monster (also a white supremacist) who murdered 9 innocent people in 2015 at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in South Carolina.

I was really down in the dumps this morning and didn’t think I would be able to write a smile for tonight. And then something made me smile. My former assistant Brandon wrote me that he and another one of my favorite former colleagues, Mary Beth, went to my cousin’s charity event on Saturday night in Cleveland.

Brandon left CSIS to go to law school and one day he is going to be a fine national security lawyer who uses all of his training to help people. Mary Beth left CSIS to work in inner city education, which she is now doing in Cleveland—a place that really needs her help. And the charity my cousin founded, MedWish International, is a nonprofit organization that saves lives and the environment by repurposing discarded medical supplies and equipment to provide humanitarian aid in developing countries.

The above made me think about the organization that my wife founded and runs, the Anchor Fund, which supports victims of domestic abuse and sexual violence in the Washington metropolitan area by providing critical funds to meet their urgent needs.

So while I’m sad, as I am sure so many Americans are, I’m also thinking today about all of the good that people are doing to help others.  That makes me smile. Sometimes it’s just a simple email that can show you the light.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      