
        The Evening: Mail Bombs, Putin’s Warning, Morning Dew and More
October 24, 2018Good Evening,

It's Wednesday, October 24th.

Explosive Sent

Authorities are investigating potential explosives sent to CNN and liberal political figures, including former President Barack Obama, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and billionaire donor George Soros, as the White House today denounced the “terrorizing acts,” Politico’s Rebecca Morin  reports.

MBS Vows Justice

Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman vowed today that the killers of Jamal Khashoggi would be brought to justice, in his first public comments since the journalist’s murder sparked global condemnation, as Reuters’ Marwa Rashad, Stephen Kalin and Katie Paul  report.

Dive Deeper : “Critical Questions: The Implications of Khashoggi’s Death for Saudi Arabia,” by CSIS’s Jon Alterman.

“What Does Khashoggi’s Murder Tell Us About the Saudi Power Structure?” by the Washington Institute’s Simon Henderson.

“What Does the Saudi Response to the Khashoggi Scandal Mean?” by Carnegie’s Yasmine Farouk.

Russia Will Target Nations Hosting U.S. Missiles

Russia’s Vladimir Putin warned today that if the United States deploys intermediate-range missiles in Europe, Russia will have to target the nations that would host them, as the AP’s Vladimir Isachenkov  reports.

Dive Deeper : “The Consequences of U.S. Withdrawal From the INF Treaty," a podcast with Brookings' Frank Rose.

Visit CSIS’s interactive micro website “Missile Threat.”

Fed Report: Growing Concerns About Tariffs

Businesses said they were still optimistic about the economy’s growth trajectory, but indicated concerns that tariffs would continue to push up costs, according to a Federal Reserve report released today, as the Wall Street Journal’s Sarah Chaney and Kate Davidson  report.

Dive Deeper : See CSIS’s all things trade micro website and podcast series “The Trade Guys.”

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

3

Freelance Japanese journalist Jumpei Yasuda, who was kidnapped more than three years ago in Syria, has been released.

Source:  CBS News 

Critical Quote


"Acts of political violence of any kind have no place in the United States of America."


— President Donald Trump

iDeas Lab

 
The trade policy of the United States is determined at the federal level in Washington, DC, but it’s the 50 states that either reap its rewards or bear its costs. Visit  The Trade Guys  website to learn more.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Spencer Platt/Getty Images) A bomb-sniffing dog is deployed outside of the Time Warner Center after a suspicious package with potentially explosive devices was discovered.

Recommended Reading

“Defining the Future of Work, before It Defines Us,” by CSIS’s Daniel Runde and Aaron Milner.

This Town Tomorrow

At  2:00 p.m., CSIS will host a conversation with Thomas J. Bollyky on his new book,  Plagues and the Paradox of Progress: Why the World is Getting Healthier in Worrisome Ways.

Also, at  10:30 a.m., the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace will hold a discussion on a forthcoming article addressing the recent intensification of hostilities between Pakistan and India.

And at  3:30 p.m.  The Atlantic Council will hold a public event on the resurgence of great power competition as a major challenge to security in Northern Europe.

Video

Today, CSIS hosted a panel discussion addressing the evolution, challenges, and future of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Experts came together to discuss how AMISOM’s funders and troop contributors envision its future and weigh in on potential avenues through which AMISOM could transition from Somalia. Watch the full event  here.

Podcasts


International trade is making headlines a lot these days. And news changes fast. A trade war with China? Bad blood between our closest allies and trading partners, like Canada? It’s hard to keep up. Trade experts Scott Miller and Bill Reinsch break down the buzz around trade. They get to the root of how it affects policy, and lay out how it impacts your day-to-day. Most importantly, they talk about trade in terms that everyone can understand.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

Thank you all kindly for the amazing emails regarding last night’s smiles (which featured a clip of the Grateful Dead performing “Deal.”) What I love most is the requests you sent! “Bertha,” emailed from one of you, “Althea” from another. My guys at The Palm, the incomparably cool Michael Melore and Eric Forsythe were talking Grateful Dead smiles today at lunch.

Ron sent an email calling out “Morning Dew” and sent me a thoughtful email about the intellectual history of the song—“Morning Dew” is a post-apocalyptic folk rock song written by Canadian singer Bonnie Dobson. The lyrics represent a dialogue between the last man and woman left standing on earth. Dark stuff indeed, but Jerry Garcia and the Dead turned it into something that was musically uplifting and astonishing.

For most aficionados, the greatest live version of “Morning Dew” was played at Cornell University on May 8, 1977. There’s no video of that performance but the audio alone is excellent.

And, if you want to watch the band perform “Morning Dew” just a week or so earlier than the Cornell show—April 27, 1977 at the Capitol Theatre in Port Chester, NY, the video is available  here.

Nothing left to do but smile.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      