
        The Evening: Brexit, Oil and Gas, Fiyo on the Bayou and More
November 14, 2018Good Evening,

It's Wednesday, November 14th.

Brexit Go-Ahead

British Prime Minister Theresa May secured cabinet approval for her Brexit deal today, clearing an important hurdle but setting the stage for a battle in Parliament that could shake her government and unravel the agreement with the European Union for Britain’s orderly withdrawal, as the WSJ’s Max Colchester  reports.

Dive Deeper : “Bracing for Brexit: Theresa May’s Endgame,” by CSIS’s Heather Conley.

Oil and Gas Prices

The price of oil bounced back today from its worst one-day decline since July, adding to the volatility of a week dominated by fears of a slowdown in global demand, as the FT’s Gregory Meyer and Anjli Raval  report.

And, as the FT’s Meyer also  reports, U.S. natural gas prices rose 18 per cent — their biggest one-day gain in eight years — as the onset of winter tests the ability of shale production to supply the country.

Dive Deeper : “OPEC’s Dilemma—Markets Are Complicated!” by CSIS’s Frank Verrastro, Kevin Book and Larry Goldstein.

“Oil Prices Are Tumbling. Volatility Aside, Expect Them to Stay Low Over the Next 20 Years,” by Brookings’ George Perry.

Iran's Rant

The United States has chosen the wrong path in re-imposing sanctions on Iran and will be defeated, Iranian President Hassan Rouhani said today, as Reuters  reports.

Dive Deeper : “Tehran's International Targets: Assessing Iranian Terror Sponsorship,” a Washington Institute event held yesterday with the State Department's top counterterrorism official, Ambassador Nathan Sales.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

1.8 Million

Since May, global oil output has climbed by 1.8 million barrels a day. The U.S. has provided 1 million barrels a day of growth and Saudi Arabia and Russia added 620,000 barrels a day and 445,000 barrels a day, respectively.

Source:  International Energy Agency 

Critical Quote


"The path they have chosen is wrong and incorrect… It’s clear for everyone that the incorrect and cruel sanctions of America will harm the dear and honorable people of our country."


— Iranian President Hassan Rouhani.

iDeas Lab


Since President Trump announced renewed Iran sanctions, Iranian global oil exports have dropped from 2.5 million barrels of oil per day to 1.5 million barrels of oil.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Josh Edelson/AFP/Getty Images). A Butte County firefighter looks over burned properties today in Paradise, California.

Recommended Reading

“Midterm Election Results—What Did It Mean for Trade?” by CSIS’s Bill Reinsch.

This Town Tomorrow

At  10:30 a.m., CSIS will hold a public discussion on the role of the Venezuelan diaspora and how it can best organize and take action to provide support for Venezuela.

Then, at  2:00 p.m., CSIS will host Dr. Kai-Fu Lee to discuss his new book, “AI Superpowers: China, Silicon Valley, and the New World Order” and the role of Artificial Intelligence in shaping the future of human society.

And at  5:00 p.m., Senator Mark Warner and Harvey Rishikof will join CSIS experts for an examination of foreign influence operations that go beyond elections to undermine other democratic institutions, such as our justice system, and democracy itself.

Video

Today, CSIS launched a new video series: “What’s Happening?” In its inaugural episode, Moises Rendon of the CSIS Americas Program breaks down how Venezuela, once considered the ‘Switzerland of Latin America,’ became one of the most pernicious humanitarian crises in the world. Find out “What’s Happening?” in Venezuela  here.

Podcasts


Tommy Vietor of the Pod Save The World podcast sat down with CSIS's Korea Chair Fellow, Lisa Collins, to discuss the Beyond Parallel report detailing North Korea's continued development of its missile program.

Listen to their interview  here.

Smiles

Thanks for the great notes about New Orleans.  Here’s a show  I attended, the Neville Brothers at Jazz Fest in May of 1990. I’ll never forget it—musical alchemy doesn’t exist like this on a daily basis in most places. But in New Orleans it does.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      