
        ISP Brief October 2018
October 31, 2018It's our pleasure to send you the October Edition of the ISP Brief, the monthly newsletter of the CSIS International Security Program. The ISP Brief features articles and commentary written by our scholars including analysis as published in various media sources (including video and audio highlights) and links to recent events. We hope the newsletter provides you, our readers, a snapshot of the excellent work underway in ISP, and the engaging thoughts of our experts. As always, your feedback is welcome.

Featured

International Collaboration in Human Spaceflight: A Conversation with Dr. Jeanette Epps (NASA) 
October 29, 2018
The Smart Women, Smart Power Initiative and the Aerospace Security Project welcomed Dr. Jeanette Epps, NASA Astronaut, to CSIS on Monday to discuss her pathbreaking experiences as an astronaut and the importance of international cooperation in space.


Prevent to Protect: From Counter-Radicalization to Disengagement 
October 26, 2018
Seth G. Jones, director of the Transnational Threats Program, sat down with Muriel Domenach, Secretary General of France's Committee for the Prevention of Delinquency and Radicalization for a conversation about France's ongoing efforts to counter radicalization and violent extremism.


The United States' Role in Space Situational Awareness 
October 10, 2018
The CSIS Aerospace Security Project held a panel discussion on current issues affecting Space Situational Awareness (SSA). Moderated by Kaitlyn Johnson, panelists included Bhavya Lal, Institute for Defense Analyses; Victoria Samson, Secure World Foundation; and Audrey Schaffer, Office of the Secretary of Defense.


Defense360 Series: FY 2018 Endgame 
October 2018
D360's FY 2018 Endgame series reflects on the strategies and policies outlined by the Trump administration over the past fiscal year and analyzes their impact on the defense sector.



Publications

READ  - "The Protection of Civilians in U.S. Partnered Operations" by Melissa Dalton, Daniel Mahanty, Hijab Shah, Julie Snyder, Jenny McAvoy, and Kelsey Hampton.

READ  - "Going on the Offensive: A U.S. Strategy to Combat Russian Information Warfare" by Seth G. Jones.

READ  - "Defense Buildup: Where Are the Forces?" by Mark Cancian.

READ  - "Why We Need a Space Force" by Todd Harrison.

READ  - "Why a Space Force Can Wait" by Kaitlyn Johnson.

READ  - "Security Cooperation as a National Defense Strategy Tool" by Hijab Shah and Melissa Dalton.

READ  - "The U.S. Strategy in Afghanistan: The Perils of Withdrawal" by Seth G. Jones.

READ  - "Review Warns Defense Industrial Base Faces 'Unprecedented Set Of Challenges'" by Rhys McCormick.


READ  - "The Year of the Industrial Base" by Samantha Cohen and Andrew P. Hunter.

READ  - "Axis Rising: Iran's Evolving Regional Strategy and Non-State Partnerships in the Middle East" by Brian Katz.

READ  - "What Can 24 Satellites Do for U.S. Missile Defense?" by Thomas G. Roberts.

READ  - "Continuity Is Not Consensus: The Future Nuclear Posture Review" by Rebecca Hersman.

READ  - "Be Afraid? Be Very Afraid?—Why the United States Needs a Counterstrategy to China's Belt and Road Initiative" by William C. Pacatte III.

READ  - "The Trump Administration's Pakistan Strategy: History Repeating Itself?" by Hijab Shah.

READ  - "Competing in the Gray Zone" by Michael Matlaga and John Schaus.

READ  - "Leaving the INF Treaty Now Is the Right Call" by Ian Williams.

READ  - "From the Ashes of the Nuclear Deal: The Trump Administration's Iran Strategy" by Hijab Shah and Melissa Dalton.




Multimedia

LISTEN  - Suzanne Spaulding, Senior Adviser for Homeland Security with the International Security Program, discusses how Russian influence campaigns are impacting public confidence in democratic systems, including the courts and elections, and what the U.S. should do to counter them on the Smart Women, Smart Power podcast.

LISTEN  - The sixth episode of Moonstruck  features Luca Parmitano, an Italian astronaut and Dava Newman, a professor at MIT and former NASA Deputy Administrator to discuss "The Hand-Me-Down Space Suit."

LISTEN  - Ambassador Bonnie Jenkins of Women of Color Advancing Peace and Security interviewed Beverly Kirk about working in journalism, the Smart Women, Smart Power program, and why education is an issue of national security.

LISTEN  - Suzanne Spaulding discusses the importance of maintaining public confidence in the security of elections with Nick Holland from Information Security Media Group.

WATCH  - Dr. Kathleen Hicks spoke on a panel, "Are the U.S. and China Destined for War?" at the United States Naval Institute, as a part of "The New China Challenge."


WATCH  - At the AUSA 2018 Warriors Corner, Andrew P. Hunter spoke on Future Vertical Lift Cross - Functional Team Update" with Brig. Gen. Wally Rugen and Brig. Gen. Thomas Todd III.

WATCH  - Suzanne Spaulding appears on CNBC's "Power Lunch" to discuss the cyber threat from China.


WATCH  - Todd Harrison joined a panel at The Heritage Foundation's "2019 Index of U.S. Military Strength."

WATCH  - "Free Speech and National Security" hosted by Tom Karako at CSIS, with panelists Gabriel Schoenfeld, Melanie Marlowe, Jamil Jaffer, and Greg Lukianoff.


WATCH  - Todd Harrison  discusses the Trump administration's plan to cut $33 billion from DoD's 2020 budget.





Upcoming Events

Artificial Intelligence and National Security: The Importance of the AI Ecosystem 
November 5, 2018
10:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m
CSIS Headquarters, 1616 Rhode Island Ave, NW

Harnessing Artificial Intelligence to Innovate and Grow - A Conversation with Julie Sweet, CEO - Accenture North America November 5, 2018
5:30 p.m. - 6:30 p.m.
CSIS Headquarters, 1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW

Reenergizing the Missile Defense Enterprise
November 13, 2018
9:30 a.m. - 10:30 a.m.
CSIS Headquarters, 1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW

Countering Adversary Attacks on Democracy - It's not just about Elections November 15, 2018
5:00 p.m. - 6:30 p.m.
CSIS Headquarters, 1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW

PONI 2018 Winter Conference 
December 4, 2018
8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.
CSIS Headquarters, 1616 Rhode Island Ave, NW




In Case You Missed It

The Protection of Civilians in U.S. Partnered Operations 
October 30, 2018


Book Launch: The Great Delusion 
October 17, 2018

Book Launch: LikeWar: The Weaponization of Social Media 
October 5, 2018


Maritime Security Dialogue: Naval Aviation - Readiness Recovery for Combat 
October 5, 2018

Nuclear Energy, Naval Propulsion, and National Security 
October 2, 2018




Media Highlights

"There really had been some pent-up demand within the Department of Defense for modernization, for training, for maintenance. Now [with] the sudden increase in the budget in fiscal year 2018 and fiscal year 2019, you see some of that pent-up demand being unleashed in the market." -Todd Harrison in     The Wall Street Journal     on October 25, 2018.

"The absence of an INF may mean it might just be a little bit easier to come up with delivery systems that are not quite so sophisticated that can serve our purposes, but we are not limited by the shackles of the treaty." - Tom Karako in  Foreign Policy  on October 22, 2018.

"What makes future vertical lift so interesting to me is the fact that we are on the cusp of a generational leap of technology." - Andrew Hunter in  National Defense Magazine  on October 11, 2018.

"After years of focusing on the international violent extremism, we're starting to see an increase in resources on the threat here at home." - Seth G. Jones in  TIME  on October 29, 2018.

“The level of public-facing ownership of the US presence in eastern Syria and at al-Tanf is a marked contrast to a year ago. What is less clear is to what end." - Melissa Dalton in  Buzzfeed News  on October 3, 2018.

"It's deep enough you will have to have cuts across the board, every area will be affected." - Mark Cancian in  Stars and Stripes  on October 26, 2018.
      