
        The Evening: South China Sea Clash, Russian Warheads, Hand in Glove and More
October 2, 2018Good Evening,

It's Tuesday, October 2nd.

U.S. and China Clash over South China Sea

The United States and China today traded new accusations over naval operations in the South China Sea after warships from each country came perilously close to colliding in the disputed waters, as the New York Times’ Steven Lee Myers  reports.

Dive Deeper:  See CSIS’s interactive micro website, the Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative (AMTI) and its latest feature,   South China Sea Energy Exploration and Development.

North Korea Willing to Walk Away

Pyongyang today suggested it might walk away from denuclearization talks if the U.S. continues to resist making a declaration to end the 1950-53 Korean War, as the Wall Street Journal’s Andrew Jeong  reports.

Dive Deeper:  Listen to the CSIS podcast “The Impossible State.”

Russian Warheads

Russia must halt its covert development of a banned cruise missile system or the United States will seek to destroy it before it becomes operational, Washington’s envoy to NATO said today, as Reuters’ Robin Emmott  reports.

Dive Deeper:    Tailored Assurance: Balancing Deterrence and Disarmament in Responding to NATO-Russia Tension, by the Institute Francais des Relations Internationales’ Heather Williams.


French Freeze

French authorities today froze the assets of the interior security section of Iran's Intelligence Ministry as well as those of two Iranians, one a diplomat who is a suspect in an alleged aborted bid to attack an Iranian exile group, as the AP’s Elaine Ganley  reports.


After NAFTA

President Trump looks to be preparing for a potentially protracted economic war with China by clearing the decks of disputes with America’s other trading competitors, as Bloomberg’s Rich Miller, Andrew Mayeda and Jenny Leonard  report.

Dive Deeper:  “Exit NAFTA, Enter USMCA,” by CSIS’s Bill Reinsch.

“For Mexico, Canada, and the United States, a Step Backwards on Trade and Investment,” by the Peterson Institute’s Jeffrey Schott.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

2,565

2,565 candidates are braving serious security risks to run for Parliament in Afghanistan. Seven candidates have already been killed.
Source:  NYT 

Critical Quote


"Counter measures (by the United States) would be to take out the missiles that are in development by Russia in violation of the treaty…They (Russia) are on notice."


— U.S. ambassador to NATO Kay Bailey Hutchison

iDeas Lab


The U.S. Energy Information Agency estimates that the South China Sea holds about 190 trillion cubic feet of natural gas and 11 billion barrels of oil, most of which lie along the margins of the South China Sea rather than under disputed islets and reefs. Explore the energy blocks of the South China Sea using CSIS's Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative's newest  interactive feature.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit: Carl Court/Getty Images). A bridge sits destroyed after being hit by an earthquake and tsunami. Photo taken today in Palu, Indonesia.

Recommended Reading

“Surge in fighting among Libya’s ‘super militias’ imperils Western peace efforts,” by the Washington Post ’s Sudarsan Raghavan.

This Town Tomorrow

At  10:00 a.m., join CSIS for a special presentation of the newly released report,  Credit and Credibility: Risks to China's Economic Resilience.

Also, at  10:00 a.m., CSIS will host Ambassador Richard L. Armitage and Professor Joseph S. Nye for the release of a bi-partisan study on the U.S.-Japan alliance.

And at   3:30 p.m.   CSIS will host a discussion on how Russia is likely to affect and be affected by the evolving European security order.

Video

Today, CSIS hosted the launch of a new report on global attitudes towards the United States from the Pew Research Center entitled,   Trump’s International Ratings Remain Low, Especially Among Key Allies. The report examines the global public image of the United States, including international public opinion of U.S. President Donald Trump and the global balance of power between the U.S. and China. Watch the full event  here.

Podcasts


The Smart Women, Smart Power biweekly podcast features powerful, in-depth conversations with women leaders from around the globe who are experts in foreign policy, national security, international business, and international development.

Listen on  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

For all of you  Smiths  fans who liked the Radiohead cover yesterday but wanted to see the real thing, here goes…

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      