
        ISP Brief November 2018
November 30, 2018It's our pleasure to send you the November Edition of the ISP Brief, the monthly newsletter of the CSIS International Security Program. The ISP Brief features articles and commentary written by our scholars including analysis as published in various media sources (including video and audio highlights), and links to recent events. We hope the newsletter provides you, our readers, a snapshot of the excellent work underway in ISP, and the engaging thoughts of our experts. As always, your feedback is welcome.

Featured Events

2018 Global Security Forum: Prospects and Priorities for U.S. Gray Zone Competition 
November 27, 2018
Dr. Kathleen H. Hicks sat down for an armchair discussion with Admiral Michael S. Rogers, 2nd Commander of the United States Cyber Command and the 17th Director of the National Security Agency


Supporting Global Integration: The Joint Staff Approach to Air and Missile Defense 
November 26, 2018
Dr. Tom Karako spoke with BG Clement Coward, Commander, 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command, and JIAMDO Director, 2017-2018, and BG(P) Sean Gainey, JIAMDO Director, and Deputy Director Force Protection, J-8 to discuss the organization's history, mission, and future opportunities.


Countering Adversary Attacks on Democracy - It's not just about elections 
November 15, 2018
The Defending Democratic Institutions Project hosted Senator Mark Warner for a conversation about the recent midterm elections. Suzanne Spaulding, Director of DDI, also spoke with Senator Warner about foreign influence operations that go beyond elections to undermine other democratic institutions, such as our justice system, and democracy itself.


Harnessing Artificial Intelligence to Innovate and Grow - A Conversation with Julie Sweet, CEO - Accenture North America 
November 5, 2018
The Smart Women, Smart Power Initiative welcomed Julie Sweet, CEO of Accenture North America, to CSIS to discuss artificial intelligence, innovation, and re-skilling the workforce force for the future.





Featured Reports

Zone Defense: Countering Competition in the Space between War and Peace 
Over the past 27 years, the United States has often planned and operated as though competition has ended and that there would be an inexorable pull toward U.S.-led institutions and world views. The 2018 Global Security Forum Experts Workshop report, by Kathleen Hicks, John Schaus, and Michael Matlaga, proposes initiatives the United States could undertake to better advance U.S. interests over the coming decade.


The Evolution of the Salafi-Jihadist Threat 
Despite nearly two decades of U.S.-led counterterrorism operations, there are nearly four times as many Sunni Islamic militants today as there were on September 11, 2001. Seth G. Jones and the Transnational Threats Project explore the current and future challenges from the Islamic State, Al-Qaeda, and other groups in their latest report.

Photo: Noorullah Shirzada/AFP/Getty Images

How Much Will the Space Force Cost? 
Todd Harrison, Director of the Aerospace Security Project, dives into the proposed creation of a new military service for space, known as the Space Force. He proposes three options: Space Corps, Space Force-Heavy, and Space Force-Lite, and analyzes the costs and benefits of each.

Photo: United Launch Alliance

The Rise of Far-Right Extremism in the United States 
Right-wing extremism in the United States appears to be growing. The number of terrorist attacks by far-right perpetrators rose over the past decade, more than quadrupling between 2016 and 2017. Seth G. Jones addresses this problem and offers guidance on how U.S. federal and local agencies should be doubling down to counter the threat.

Photo: Brendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images




Publications

READ  - "Artificial Intelligence and National Security: The Importance of the AI Ecosystem" by Andrew Hunter and Lindsey Sheppard.

READ  - "Beyond the Radar Archipelago: A New Roadmap for Missile Defense Sensors" by Tom Karako.

READ  - "U.S Military Forces in FY 2019: The Buildup and Its Limits" by Mark F. Cancian.

READ  - "America's FY2020 Defense Strategy and Programming Crisis" by Anthony Cordesman.

READ  - "New Entrants and Small Business Graduation in the Market for Federal Contracts" by Andrew Hunter, Gregory Sanders, and Samantha Cohen.

READ  - "Congress Can Unite on Global Affairs" by Kathleen H. Hicks and Louis Lauter.

READ  - "A Space Force is Worth the Price" by Todd Harrison.

READ  - "5 Reasons to be Concerned about Deploying U.S. Troops along the Southern Border" by Alice Hunt Friend.

READ  - "The Trump Administration's New Budget Strategy Will Fail" by Mark F. Cancian.

READ  - "Don't Dumb Down this US Army Radar" by Tom Karako.

READ  - "Intelligence and You: A Guide for Policymakers" by Brian Katz.

READ  - "Saudi Arabia, the Gulf, and the United Sates: Abizaid's Mission Impossible?" by Anthony Cordesman.

READ  - "Axis Rising: Iran's Evolving Regional Strategy and Non-State Partnerships in the Middle East" by Brian Katz.

READ  - "The Risks and Tradeoffs of a Security Cooperation" by Melissa Dalton.




Multimedia

WATCH  - Tom Karako joined the CNN Situation Room to discuss the new commercial satellite images that identified more than a dozen undeclared North Korean missile operating bases.


LISTEN  - Beverly Kirk, Director, Smart Women, Smart Power Initiative, sits down with Linda Jojo, Chief Technology Officer of United Airlines to discuss "Security and Technology in the Air" on the Smart Women, Smart Power Podcast.

WATCH  - Senior Fellow and Deputy Director of ISP, Melissa Dalton spoke on a panel, "Examining U.S. Saudi Arabia Relations" at the Center for American Progress discussing the future of American relations with Saudi Arabia.


LISTEN  - Alice Hunt Friend, Senior Fellow, and Mara Karlin joined Scott Maucione on Federal Drive to discuss the faith Americans are placing in military officers.

WATCH  - Seth G. Jones spoke on CNN's Smerconish about the growing Sunni jihadist threat in the Middle East.


LISTEN  - Mark F. Cancian spoke with Tom Temin on Federal Drive to share his analysis of the 2019 defense budget.

WATCH  - Todd Harrison joined C-SPAN's Washington Journal for the "Your Money" series to discuss the Pentagon failing its first-ever comprehensive audit.


LISTEN  - Seth G. Jones, spoke on Defense One Radio's episode, "What if America Pulls out of Afghanistan?"

LISTEN  - Todd Harrison spoke with Kimberly Adams on Marketplace to discuss the cost estimates of a Space Force.

WATCH  - "Economic Security as National Security" hosted by Andrew Hunter at CSIS, featured a keynote address from Dr. Peter Navarro, Assistant to the President and Director of the White House Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy.





Upcoming Events

PONI 2018 Winter Conference 
December 4, 2018
8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.
CSIS Headquarters, 1616 Rhode Island Ave, NW

Book Launch: Rules for Rebels   by Dr. Max Abrahms 
December 5, 2018
11:00 a.m. - 12:15 p.m.
CSIS Headquarters, 1616 Rhode Island Ave, NW

Maritime Security Dialogue: A Conversation with Hon. Richard V. Spencer, Secretary of the Navy 
December 6, 2018
9:30 a.m. - 10:30 a.m.
CSIS Headquarters, 1616 Rhode Island Ave, NW




In Case You Missed It

Maritime Security Dialogue: The Return of Great Power Competition and the Second Fleet with VADM Andrew "Woody" Lewis 
November 28, 2018


2018 Global Security Forum: Prospects and Priorities for U.S. Gray Zone Competition 
November 27, 2018 


Reenergizing the Missile Defense Enterprise 
November 13, 2018


Artificial Intelligence and National Security: The Importance of the AI Ecosystem 
November 5, 2018





Media Highlights

"There is a strong fear of complacency, that people have become so used to the United States achieving what it wants in the world, to include militarily, that it isn't heeding the warning signs. It's the flashing red that we are trying to relay." - Kathleen H. Hicks in  The Washington Post   on November 14, 2018.

"We were a leader and now we are a laggard, stuck with expensive manned options and not doing nearly the experimentation and learning we need to. We'll need to watch and learn from China and others now." - Sam Brannen in  Defense One   on November 6, 2018.

"Russia appears to be using air defense sales within much bigger political and economic frameworks. In some cases, the purchase of S-400 looks a bit like what the ancient Romans called tribute." - Tom Karako in   CNBC   on November 14, 2018.

"You don't need to worry about a dull period. I don't know that control [of Congress] is the issue. I think it might well be the partisanship of both houses and how hard it may be to agree on anything, move things forward, and avoid turning every foreign policy issue into a partisan issue." - Anthony Cordesman in   VOA   on November 7, 2018.

“It would be smart to drive home the importance of standing up the first new operational component since DHS' establishment by giving them a facility to house the entire mission." - Suzanne Spaulding in  Inside Cybersecurity   on November 15, 2018.

"This is going to turn out to be a huge disappointment to people watching DoD. They're going to expect billions of dollars in misspent money, but that's unlikely to materialize. DoD knows exactly where it spends its money ." -Mark Cancian in  Breaking Defense   on November 14, 2018.
      