
        The Evening: China Russia Alliance, Idlib, Gypsy and More
September 11, 2018Good Evening,

It's Tuesday, September 11th.

Note: The Evening will be “gone fishin’” on September 12.

China Russia Alliance

China and Russia sent an unambiguous message to Washington today--these historic rivals are becoming allies as Vladimir Putin welcomed Xi Jinping as the headline guest at an annual conference focused on Russia’s Far East while in Siberia, more than 3,000 Chinese troops joined Russian soldiers for the country’s biggest military drills since the Soviet era, as the Washington Post’s Anton Troianovski, Anna Fifield and Paul Sonne  report.

Dive Deeper: “Moscow Looks to Flex Its Muscles in the East,” by the Atlantic Council’s Brooks Tigner.

Bombing in Afghanistan

Extremists in eastern Afghanistan bombed a peaceful protest today, killing at least 32 people, officials said, the deadliest in a series of attacks in Nangarhar Province over the day, as the New York Times’ Zabihullah Ghazi and Fahim Abed  report.

Dive Deeper: “Peace in Pieces: The Tragedy of Syria, Iraq, and Afghanistan,” by CSIS’s Anthony Cordesman.

Iran seeks to avert disaster in Syria's Idlib

Iran shares the United Nations’ concern about a potential humanitarian catastrophe in Syria’s Idlib province and will seek to avert it, Hossein Jaberi Ansari, special assistant to Iran’s foreign minister said today, as Reuters  reports.

Dive Deeper:  “Tensions Escalate in Idlib,” via the Middle East Institute.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Fall

Now enrolling for the Fall, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

17

Today marks the 17th anniversary of the September 11, 2001 attacks on the United States that killed more than 3,000 people.

Source:  USA Today.

Critical Quote


"We are ready as anybody has ever been"


—  President Trump speaking today on preparations for Hurricane Florence.

iDeas Lab


The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo by Alex Wong/Getty Images.) An American flag is unfurled down the side of the Pentagon to mark the 17th anniversary of the 9/11 terror attacks.

Recommended Reading

“Fight to Retake Last ISIS Territory in Syria Begins,” by the New York Times’ Rukmini Callimachi.

Also, check out the new Young Professionals in Foreign Policy  website!

This Town Tomorrow

Join CSIS at  10:00 a.m.  for "The Future of Blockchain Technology" for a discussion on how governments and businesses are thinking about the increased use of blockchain technology and its regulatory environment.

And at  2:00 p.m., join CSIS for a discussion with Ambassador Alice Wells and David F. Helvey to speak on U.S.-India relations following the 2+2 Dialogue in New Delhi.

At  12:30 p.m., the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace will host a discussion on recent attempts by Russia and China to counter U.S. conventional assets.

Video

Yesterday, CSIS hosted a conversation on President Trump's newly announced Space Force proposal.  Watch  Robert Work, Gen. Robert Kehler, Letitia Long, and Sean O’Keefe discuss what a Space Force would mean for DoD and the future of national security space.

Podcasts


North Korea is the Impossible State. Each week join the people who know the most about North Korea—The Center for Strategic and International Studies’ Victor Cha, Mike Green, and Sue Mi Terry—for an insiders discussion with host H. Andrew Schwartz about the United States’ top national security priority.

Listen to this week's episode on  Apple Podcasts  or  SoundCloud.

Smiles

I know you can’t get enough of the new Fleetwood Mac—I can’t either. “The Chain” on Ellen’s show blew me away. The encore, “Gypsy,” with Stevie Nicks on lead was also excellent. By the way, who would have ever thought the Big Mac would perform on daytime TV? I’m so glad they did.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      