
        The Evening:  North Korea, Gaza War, Fire and Brimstone and More
November 13, 2018Good Evening,

It's Tuesday, November 13th.

North Korea

Yesterday, with satellite images and analysis provided by the CSIS Korea Program’s Beyond Parallel Project, the New York Times  reported  that North Korea is moving ahead with its ballistic missile program.

And while President Trump doesn’t dispute the CSIS report’s findings, he did lash out today at the Times whose news story Trump branded “more Fake News” without disputing its content, as the Washington Post’s John Wagner and Adam Taylor  report.

Dive Deeper:  “Undeclared North Korea: Missile Operating Bases Revealed,” by CSIS’s Joseph Burmudez, Victor Cha and Lisa Collins.

Gaza War

Egypt has mediated a cease-fire between Hamas and Israel in Gaza, according to Hamas officials, as an intense exchange of fire between the two sides halted Tuesday amid hopes that a wider war between them could be averted, as the Wall Street Journal’s Felicia Schwartz and Dov Lieber  report.

Dive Deeper:  “Gaza flare-up threatens Egyptian-led negotiations,” by the Middle East Institute’s Mirrette Mabrouk.

Brexit Deal

UK and EU officials have agreed the draft text of a Brexit agreement after months of negotiations, as the BBC  reports.

Dive Deeper: "Bracing for Brexit: Theresa May’s Endgame," by CSIS's Heather Conley.

Your Questions

Do you have any questions about trade and how a changing U.S. trade policy may affect your life? If you do, please email me your question(s) to  aschwartz@csis.org. We’ll publish some of the best questions and get our experts to answer them on an upcoming CSIS podcast.


Enroll for Spring 2019

Enroll for Spring 2019 Now enrolling for the Spring, CSIS & Syracuse University's Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs offer a new Executive Master's in International Relations. Information here.



In That Number

13

North Korea is moving ahead with its ballistic missile program at 13 hidden bases that have been identified in new commercial satellite images by CSIS.

Source: “Undeclared North Korea: Missile Operating Bases Revealed”

Critical Quote


"The story in the New York Times concerning North Korea developing missile bases is inaccurate. We fully know about the sites being discussed, nothing new - and nothing happening out of the normal. Just more Fake News. I will be the first to let you know if things go bad!"


— President Donald Trump on the CSIS satellite images provided to the Times.

iDeas Lab


Using satellite imagery, CSIS's  Beyond Parallel  program has located 13 of an estimated 20 undeclared North Korean missile operating bases. These missile bases can be used for all classes of ballistic missiles (including ICBMs), and presumably should have been identified in any final and fully verifiable denuclearization agreement.

The Andreas C. Dracopoulos iDeas Lab at CSIS enhances our research with the latest in cutting-edge web technologies, design, and video.

Optics


(Photo credit:  CNN). A fire truck drives through part of Paradise, California.

Recommended Reading

“Responding to the Xinjiang Surveillance State—and Its Likely Progeny,” by CSIS’s Amy Lehr.

This Town Tomorrow

At  9:00 a.m., the CSIS Commission on Strengthening America’s Health Security and the CSIS Africa Program will hold a panel discussion on the Ebola outbreak in Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Later, at  12:15 p.m., the CSIS Europe Program will host a conversation with Senator Chris Murphy (D-CT) on U.S. policy toward NATO and European security, Russia, the Western Balkans, as well as the U.S.-EU trade relationship.

Then, at  1:30 p.m., join CSIS again to discuss the implications of the economic challenges facing Central Asia and the authorities’ response.

And at  5:00 p.m.  CSIS will hold the next installment of the Schieffer Series, Foreign Policy Issues Facing the Next Congress.

Video

Five years have passed since China began their Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), and the U.S. is still figuring out how to properly respond to the massive infrastructure project. CSIS’s Jonathan Hillman offers commentary on the BRI in a new Wall Street Journal video on the issue. Watch the full video  here.

Podcasts


North Korea is the Impossible State. Each week join the people who know the most about North Korea—The Center for Strategic and International Studies’ Victor Cha, Mike Green, and Sue Mi Terry—for an insiders discussion with host H. Andrew Schwartz about the United States’ top national security priority.

Listen on  SoundCloud  or  Apple Podcasts.

Smiles

Last weekend, I was in New Orleans for Homecoming at my alma mater, Tulane University. Homecoming/Parents Weekend at Tulane is a great tradition (not that New Orleans needs an excuse to throw a party.)

A benefit that came along with my undergraduate education is exposure to one of America’s most important music laboratories—the Crescent City is considered to be the birthplace of American music for many, but it is also a place of great collaboration and reinvention.

When I lived in New Orleans in the late 1980s, the Big Easy’s first family of funk, the Neville Brothers, were recording their finest record, “Yellow Moon.”

I could do a review of the entire album but let’s leave that for another time. I want to focus on one track from the record, “Fire and Brimstone.”

What’s cool about “Fire and Brimstone” is that the Neville’s didn’t write the song, but they made it uniquely their own. Penned by rock pioneer Link Wray in ’71, the song as performed by Wray on his self-titled record, is an obscure bit of country-blues genius. If you want to hear the original,  listen here  and thank me later.

Back to the Neville Brothers. In 1989, they took “Fire and Brimstone” and collaborated to record a version of the song with the Dirty Dozen Brass Band, a group who revolutionized the New Orleans brass band style by incorporating funk and bebop with traditional jazz. What emerged was an organic magic that breathed new life into a forgotten song. You can listen to the “Yellow Moon” version of “Fire and Brimstone”  here  and thank me later.

Now, to last weekend. Almost 30 years after the Neville’s and the Dozen covered Link Wray’s tune, another generation of musicians is performing “Fire and Brimstone” live. To my delight, I saw this new generation which includes Neville sons and grandsons perform it live at Tipitina’s.

While it’s not exactly what I saw, I found a recently performed live clip of “Fire and Brimstone” for you to enjoy. Here’s Ivan Neville (Aaron’s son), Ian Neville (Art’s grandson) with the Dirty Dozen last month in Louisville.

I invite you to email me at  aschwartz@csis.org  and follow me on Twitter  @handrewschwartz  
      