
        The 2013 U.S.-India Strategic Dialogue
June 21, 2013This year’s U.S.-India Strategic Dialogue will be  held in New Delhi on June 24, and will be led by Secretary of State John Kerry  and External Affairs Minister Salman Khurshid of India. Secretary Kerry will be  leading a “whole of government delegation” which will include Energy Secretary  Ernest Moniz, acting Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Rand Beers,  Commander of U.S. Pacific Command Samuel Locklear, NASA Administrator Charles  Bolden, and the White House’s Director of Science and Technology Policy John  Holdren, among others.
Q1: What is the  purpose of the U.S.-India Strategic Dialogue? 
A1: The U.S.-India Strategic  Dialogue (SD) was launched in 2010 by former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton  and former Minister of External Affairs S.M. Krishna. It serves as the capstone  dialogue between the two countries. It is the highest level regularly scheduled  dialogue between the two governments, as evidenced by the leadership of both  delegations. The United States and India have over 20 other ongoing dialogues  between corresponding departments on subjects ranging from higher education to  trade, agriculture and homeland security. The SD takes into account the  progress being made within all of these more specific policy areas and directs  their focus into the broader framework of U.S.-Indian relations. It reflects a  commitment between both nations to capitalize on areas of strategic convergence,  intensify their levels of cooperation, and to resolve issues that inevitably arise  in the relationship.
Q2: What happened  at the last U.S.-India Strategic Dialogue? 
A2: The last Strategic Dialogue was  held in Washington in June 2012. The delegations were led by Clinton and  Krishna. The joint statement issued afterwards emphasized the  broadly shared interests of the two nations, particularly in the fields of  counterterrorism, regional security, energy, climate change and trade, among  many others. However, since the last dialogue, there have been some troubling economic  policy developments affecting tax policy, foreign investment, and local content  requirements, which might be addressed at the June 24 meeting. 
Q3: What are some  of the key issues that will be discussed at this year’s Strategic Dialogue?
A3: This year’s SD is set against a backdrop  of a rapidly changing strategic environment in the Indo-Pacific. India is  particularly concerned about the scheduled U.S. troop withdrawal from  Afghanistan in 2014. The United States and India will discuss their continued  engagement with Afghanistan, both in terms of security and economic development,  and recent developments including possible talks with the Taliban.
Both sides have also expressed a  desire to move forward with the Defense Technology Initiative spearheaded by  Deputy Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter. On a recent trip to India, Deputy  Secretary of State Bill Burns remarked that “there’s a strong commitment on the U.S. side to taking the  defense cooperation relationship to the next level, and we understand very well  that that means moving ahead in co-production and co-development.”
One of Secretary Kerry’s  priorities during his visit will be to revive the stalled civilian–nuclear  agreement signed between the two countries in 2008. This agreement, once an  example of a new era in post-Cold War ties, ran into implementation challenges  due to disagreement surrounding India’s nuclear liability law, which the U.S.  claims is out of step with international norms. Westinghouse Electric Company recently inked a preliminary early works  agreement with the Nuclear Power Corporation of India to install a 1,000  megawatt nuclear reactor in Gujarat, but U.S. officials have indicated that  further steps need to be taken. India has assured the United States that it  will provide further clarification within the confines of its law, but its  provisions on supplier liability remain a sticking point.
The meeting is also likely to  bring up a number of issues relating to China and Pakistan. Deputy Secretary  Burns recently remarked that the United States “support[s] the healthiest and  strongest possible relationship between India and China.” However, China’s  recent incursion into Indian territory, together with its claims over the South  China Sea continue to raise concerns across the region about their ambitions. Significantly,  Prime Minister Singh recently commented that India is willing to be a net  provider of security in the Indo-Pacific region, which is a noteworthy  departure from past statements.
Regarding Pakistan, cautious  optimism about India–Pakistan relations has emerged with the recent election of  Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. Delhi has welcomed Prime Minister Sharif’s recent  overtures. Both the United States and India remain hopeful that Prime Minister  Sharif and Pakistan will be able to further expand India-Pakistan trade by  granting India Most Favored Nation status.
On the economic front, as  Assistant Secretary Robert O. Blake said at a recent CSIS event, “economic  issues like intellectual property protection, local content restrictions and a  continued cap on FDI are likely to be on top of [the] agenda.”
For their part, Indian officials  are tracking the immigration debate on Capitol Hill closely, and have expressed  concern over its potential negative effects for Indian companies which employ a  significant number of high-skill workers on temporary (H1B) visas—they have  indicated that increasing the cap on H1B visas is high on their list of priorities.
Q4: Do we expect to  see real movement on economic issues, which are central to U.S.-India  relations?
A4: Both governments have remarked  that strengthening economic ties is a top priority; however, progress on challenging  trade and investment issues has not been forthcoming. Negotiations on a  bilateral investment treaty remain stalled as India reviews its model BIT  language. Investors hoping to see some movement toward a unified Indian market  via a national goods and services tax will also have to likely wait until after  India’s upcoming general election to see its implementation. Recent reports  indicate that the Indian government may also open the defense and telecom  sectors to greater foreign investment.
Both nations’ are also looking forward to reengaging  on the commercial front with a meeting of the Trade Policy Forum, a meeting  between the U.S. trade representative and India’s minister of commerce and industry.  With Wednesday’s announcement that Michael Froman has been confirmed as the  U.S. Trade Representative, both sides can now proceed to revitalize the Trade  Policy Forum after a two year hiatus. The annual CEO Forum will take place in  Washington this July, which might yield additional progress on the economic  side.
Q5: Energy is  taking on more importance in the relationship. What energy issues are likely to  come up? 
A5: U.S. liquid natural gas (LNG)  exports to India will likely be a topic of discussion. India remains  enthusiastic about receiving additional imports of U.S. LNG supplies. In 2011,  the Energy Department granted the first authorization to export LNG to non-FTA  countries to a terminal in Louisiana. And on May 17 the department backed  further expansion of LNG exports by conditionally approving exports from another  terminal in Texas.
Developing renewable energy  sources remains vital to the United States and India in the context of climate  change and continued economic growth. Deputy Secretary Burns has noted that  clean energy cooperation is an area with much potential.
President Obama is planning to  articulate and push a climate change strategy in coming weeks, recently calling  it a global “moral imperative”. Experts often note the susceptibility of South  Asia to the effects of global warming, and Secretary Kerry, well-known for his  stance on the subject, will very likely include it in his discussions.
Q6: In light of the  U.S. strategic rebalance to Asia and India’s revitalized “Look East” policy,  how will the dialogue facilitate greater engagement with the broader region? 
A6: Convergences in East Asia are  increasing between the United States and India. Secretary Kerry will likely  discuss with his Indian counterpart how to better connect India with East Asian  markets through infrastructure development and a proposed Indo-Pacific Economic  Corridor. India recently helped secure Dialogue Partner-status for the United  States in the Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC). Both  sides will likely discuss the possibility of India’s further integration into  regional economic architecture, including Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)  and the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), discussions that are currently  underway.
Q7: On June 25,  Secretary Kerry will open the U.S.-India Higher Education Dialogue—what is the  importance of this?
A7: Education and job creation is  probably the single biggest current challenge for India, and its own stated  goal is to skill-up 500 million youth in the next 10 years. That is an enormous  undertaking; working together with the United States on a vocational training  system that fits the Indian environment would help bridge the current talent  gap. Almost half of U.S. undergraduates are enrolled in community colleges and  trained to work in local industry. If done right, it could be a game-changer  for job creation in individual Indian states, much like mid-day meals were.
Persis  Khambatta is a fellow with the Wadhwani Chair in U.S.-India Policy Studies at  the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) in Washington, D.C.  Guruamrit Khalsa and Samir Nair, intern  scholars with the Wadhwani Chair at CSIS, also contributed to this report.
Critical Questions is produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a  private, tax-exempt institution focusing on international public policy issues.  Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary. CSIS does not take specific  policy positions. Accordingly, all views, positions, and conclusions expressed  in this publication should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
©  2013 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights  reserved.


      