
        Is China’s Aircraft Carrier a Threat to U.S. Interests?
August 11, 2011On  August 10, 2011, China’s first aircraft carrier set sail from Dalian Port on  its maiden voyage. Announcing the sailing, China’s Defense Ministry stated that  the inaugural sea trial would be brief; some Hong Kong media have estimated the  trial would last 15 days. The Liaoning Provincial Maritime Safety  Administration issued a notice restricting vessels from traveling through an  area between the northern Yellow Sea and Liaodong Bay from August 10 to 14. The  unusually public announcement of the carrier’s sea trial stands in contrast to  the secretive test flight of China’s first stealth fighter jet last January and  its test of an antisatellite weapon in January 2007, and was welcomed by the  Pentagon as a sign of greater transparency by the People’s Liberation Army  (PLA).
The  carrier, formerly called the Varyag,  is a Soviet-era platform that China purchased from Ukraine without the engines,  rudder, and much of the operating systems. The vessel was transported to Dalian  in 2002 and began refitting. Despite widespread speculation and intelligence  about the budding Chinese aircraft carrier program, China kept mum about  developments until June 2011, when the chief of  the General Staff of the PLA, Chen Bingde, confirmed China’s first  carrier was under construction in an interview with the Hong Kong Commercial Daily. Chinese media have proposed that the  ship be dubbed the Shi Lang, after a  Qing dynasty admiral who conquered the Kingdom of Tungning (i.e., Taiwan) in  1681. There have as yet been no official statements from either the government  or the military regarding the carrier’s name.
Q1: Why is China deploying  an aircraft carrier?
A1: The acquisition of an aircraft carrier  is driven in part by China’s desire for international prestige. The United  States, United Kingdom, France, Russia, Spain, Italy, India, Brazil, and  Thailand operate a total of 21 active-service aircraft carriers (the United  States alone operates 11). An aircraft carrier is widely viewed by Chinese as a  symbol of national power and prestige. PLA officers often remind foreigners  that China is the only permanent member of the UN Security Council without a  carrier.
At  the same time, however, the procurement of the carrier is a consequence of an  improved continental threat environment that has imposed constraints on China’s  ability to develop sea power. It also represents expanded Chinese national  interests created by deeper integration into the global economy. In the past  decade, China’s trade dependence doubled from 40 percent in 2000 to 73 percent  during the 2006–2008 period, with more than 80 percent of that trade carried by  ship. Moreover, acquisition of a carrier will better enable the PLA to  implement Hu Jintao’s 2004 “New Historic Missions” and respond to demands to  undertake a range of nontraditional security operations.
Q2: What are the aircraft  carrier’s capabilities?
A2: The ex-Varyag is an Admiral Kuznetsov-class  aircraft carrier, measuring roughly 304.5 meters long and 37 meters wide. The  vessel has a displacement of 58,500 metric tons and can travel at speeds of 32  knots (37 miles per hour). Engines, generators and defense systems, including  the Type 1030 CIWS (close-in weapon system)  and the FL-3000N missile system, were added to the vessel in Dalian. As  designed, it could be armed with 8 AK-630 AA (antiaircraft) guns, 8 CADS-N-1  Kashtan CIWS, 12 P-700 Granit SSM (surface-to-surface missiles), 18 8-cell 3K95  Kinzhal SAM VLS (surface-to-air missiles, vertical-launch system), and the  RBU-12000 UDAV-1 ASW (antisubmarine warfare) rocket launcher. Also as designed,  the carrier could carry 26 fixed-wing aircraft (likely the Shenyang J-15) and  24 helicopters.
The  carrier is fitted with a “ski jump” ramp rather than the catapult used by U.S.  carriers. The carrier’s smaller size and ramp greatly reduces the number of  aircraft it can carry and how many it can operate at any one time.  Additionally, in order to take off, the fighters will carry lighter payloads  and less fuel, greatly limiting their firepower and range of operations.  Chinese Defense Ministry spokesman Geng Yansheng stated that the ex-Varyag will be used for “scientific  research, experiment and training.” Indeed, the carrier may not be well-suited  to combat, but it will give China the opportunity to train sailors and pilots  in aircraft carrier operations. Mastering the challenges of operating,  defending, and maintaining a carrier, as well as a possible accompanying  carrier task force, will take at least a decade.
Q3: How many carriers is  China building, and for what missions might they be used?
A3: China is reportedly already building at  least one if not two indigenous aircraft carriers, which are likely to be  deployed over the next 15 years. At a July 11 press briefing, General Chen  Bingde stated that no official decision had been made on  how many carriers will be built. Experts have suggested that China would need  at least three carriers for effective power projection.
The  missions for which China might use aircraft carriers remain unclear. Rather  than seek to replicate U.S. naval strategy and operations, the PLAN is more  likely to develop a limited power-projection capability that enhances China’s  ability to defend its regional interests; to protect expanding overseas  interests; to perform nontraditional security missions such as humanitarian  assistance and disaster relief, counterpiracy, noncombatant evacuation,  antiterrorism peacekeeping operations, crisis response, and military diplomacy;  and to demonstrate international responsibility.
Q4: Do China’s aircraft  carrier ambitions pose a threat to the United States and its friends and allies?
A4: Even after the ex-Varyag is fully operational, it is widely acknowledged that a lone,  obsolete aircraft carrier has limited use militarily. The main functions in the  near term will be to enhance China’s national prestige, provide personnel  training, and conduct military diplomacy. The political impact of the carrier’s  deployment will be potentially far greater, however. China’s neighbors, many of  which are increasingly anxious about China’s military modernization and  willingness to flex its muscles in disputed waters, are worried that a carrier  will provide China with additional means to project power from its coastline.  It will likely reinforce ongoing efforts by many regional countries to shore up  their own capabilities.
In  the South China Sea, where China competes with others over territorial claims,  countries such as Vietnam and the Philippines are already ramping up their sea  defense capabilities through greater military cooperation with the United  States and procurement of new platforms to bolster their ability to defend  their claims.
Bonnie Glaser is a senior fellow with the Freeman Chair in China Studies  at the Center for  Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) in Washington, D.C. Brittany  Billingsley is a research associate with the CSIS Freeman Chair.
Critical Questions is produced by the Center for Strategic  and International Studies (CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution focusing on  international public policy issues. Its research is nonpartisan and  nonproprietary. CSIS does not take specific policy positions. Accordingly, all  views, positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be  understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2011 by the Center  for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.      