Scott Kennedy
Senior Adviser, Freeman Chair in China Studies and Director, Project on Chinese Business and Political EconomyExpertise: Asia, China, Cybersecurity and Technology, Economics, Governance and Rule of Law, International Development, U.S. Development PolicyAssociated Programs: Asia Program, Freeman Chair in China Studies, Project on Chinese Business and Political Economy, Taiwan Project, The Freeman Chair China Report, China Reality CheckScott Kennedy is senior adviser of the Freeman Chair in China Studies and director of Project on Chinese Business and Political Economy at CSIS. A leading authority on China’s economic policy and its global economic relations, specific areas of focus include industrial policy, technology innovation, business lobbying, multinational business challenges in China, global governance, and philanthropy. Kennedy has been traveling to China for almost 30 years and has interviewed thousands of officials, business executives, lawyers, nonprofit organizations, and scholars. He is the author of The Fat Tech Dragon: Benchmarking China’s Innovation Drive (CSIS, 2017); (with Chris Johnson) Perfecting China Inc.: China’s 13th Five-Year Plan (CSIS, 2016), and The Business of Lobbying in China (Harvard University Press, 2005). He has edited three books, including Global Governance and China: The Dragon's Learning Curve  (Routledge, 2018), and  Beyond the Middle Kingdom: Comparative Perspectives on China’s Capitalist Transformation  (Stanford University Press, 2011). His articles have appeared in a wide array of policy, popular, and academic venues, including theNew York Times, Wall Street Journal, Foreign Affairs, Foreign Policy, China Quarterly , China Journal, and the Journal of Contemporary China.

For over 14 years, Kennedy was a professor at Indiana University (IU). From 2007 to 2014, he was the director of the Research Center for Chinese Politics & Business, and he was the founding academic director of IU’s China Office. From 1993 to 1997, he worked at the Brookings Institution. Kennedy received his Ph.D. in political science from George Washington University and his M.A. in China studies from Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.

For a full list of Scott Kennedy’s publications, organized by category, click here.
 

甘思德简介

甘思德是国际战略研究中心费和中国研究项目资深顾问兼中国商务与政治经济研究课题主任。他长期致力于研究中国经济政策以及国际经济关系，在包括产业政策、科技创新、企业参政议政、跨国公司在华的机遇和挑战、全球治理以及企业公益慈善等领域均有出色研究成果。他的著作有: 《全球治理与中国：龙的学习曲线》(Routledge, 2018年),《虚胖的科技龙》(CSIS, 2017年), 《超越‘中央王国’: 中国走向资本主义转型的比较视角》(斯坦福大学出版社, 2011年)， 《 在中国游说的事业 》(哈佛大学出版社, 2005年), 《中国相声：建交以来美国的对华政策辩论》(Rowman and Littlefield, 2003年)。他曾多次在《纽约时报》、《华尔街报》、《Foreign Affairs》、 《Foreign Policy》、《China Quarterly》、《China Journal》、《 Journal of Contemporary China 》等权威刊物上发表文章。他曾在2000年到2014年间任教于美国印第安那大学政治学系，东亚语言以及文化系和凯莱商学院商务经济与公共政策学系。2007到2014年间他曾担任印大中国政治与商务研究中心主任，并于2014年创办印大中国办公室并担任学术主任。
    