Denise E. Zheng
Senior Associate (Non-resident), Technology Policy ProgramExpertise: Asia, China, Cybersecurity, Cybersecurity and Technology, Intelligence, Surveillance and Privacy, Military Technology, Space, Technology and InnovationAssociated Programs: Technology Policy ProgramDenise E. Zheng is vice president at the Business Roundtable, where she oversees the Technology and Internet Innovation Committee. Previously, she was a senior fellow and director of the Technology Policy Program at CSIS, where she led research initiatives on cyber and emerging technology issues. She has a unique blend of expertise, including advanced technology research and development, legislative and policy strategy, and private-sector experience. Prior to CSIS, Ms. Zheng worked as chief of staff and lead science and engineering technical adviser as a contractor for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) foundational cyber warfare program, Plan X. Before DARPA, she was director for global government relations and cyber policy at CA Technologies, where she advised company executives on cybersecurity, supply chains, and software assurance issues. While at CA, she was a member of the Information Technology (IT) Sector Coordinating Council, IT Information Sharing and Analysis Center, and SAFECode. Ms. Zheng has also served as a professional staff member for the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee. In that role, she was a principal in drafting and negotiations for comprehensive cybersecurity legislation and conducted oversight of critical infrastructure protection programs, spectrum auctions, privacy, and federal IT programs. In addition to writing on technology and cybersecurity issues, she has also authored reports on U.S.-China relations, soft power, and civil space policy issues. Her writing has appeared in the New York Times and Wall Street Journal, and she has been interviewed by CNN, BBC, CBS, and NPR. Ms. Zheng holds a B.A. in economics and political science from the University of Michigan, studied government at the London School of Economics and Political Science, and completed graduate coursework in security studies at the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies.
    