Kevin Nealer
Senior Adviser (Non-resident), Simon Chair in Political EconomyAssociated Programs: Simon Chair in Political EconomyKevin G. Nealer is a principal of the Scowcroft Group, providing strategic risk advisory services and direct investment support to clients, specializing in ﬁnancial services and trade policy issues for emerging markets, with emphasis on China and Southeast Asia. Before joining the Scowcroft Group, he advised multinational clients on investment issues, project finance, and trade law/policy as a principal in the consulting affiliate of Washington's largest law firm and as vice president for corporate affairs with a leading government strategies practice. On October 1, 2014, President Obama appointed Mr. Nealer as a member of the President’s Intelligence Advisory Board. Earlier, he had served on the Board of Directors of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC), the development finance agency of the U.S. government, and as a member of OPIC’s Audit and Governance Committees until the conclusion of his term in January 2013. He is a member of the international advisory boards of Ancora Capital Management Pte, Ltd. and the board of the Australian American Council. A trade attorney and former State Department officer, Mr. Nealer previously served as trade policy adviser to the Senate Democratic leadership. A member of the Council on Foreign Relations, he is the author of numerous articles on political economy and coauthored Beginning the Journey: China, the United States, and the WTO (Council on Foreign Relations, 2001). He is a consultant to the U.S. government on trade and economic security issues. A Fulbright professor in the People’s Republic of China (1990–1991), he has served as a lecturer, program moderator, and adjunct professor of trade law and policy at the Georgetown University McDonough School of Business. Mr. Nealer received his J.D. from Case Western Reserve University and serves on its International Visiting Committee. He received his B.A. from the University of Michigan and is Chairman of the Advisory Board of the Michigan in Washington Program.
    