Conor M. Savoy
Senior Associate (Non-resident), Project on U.S. Leadership in Development and Project on Prosperity and DevelopmentExpertise: Geopolitics and International Security, Governance and Rule of Law, International Development, Private Sector Development, U.S. Development PolicyAssociated Programs: Project on U.S. Leadership in Development, Project on Prosperity and DevelopmentConor Savoy is senior associate with the Project on U.S. Leadership in Development (USLD) and Project on Prosperity and Development (PPD) at     CSIS. He joined CSIS in September 2011 as assistant director of USLD. At CSIS, he focuses on the day-to-day management of the two projects, as well as     implementing and guiding USLD’s and PPD’s research agenda. His research includes the role of the private sector in international development, governance     and rule of law, trade and investment, and development finance. In his time at CSIS, Mr. Savoy has authored or contributed to several reports, commentaries, and critical questions. He is the author of a number of CSIS publications, includingPrivate-Sector Development and U.S. Foreign Policy (April 2015), Taxes and Development (December 2014), andCombating Global Poverty (December 2013). In addition, he is the coauthor ofThe Ecosystem of U.S. International Development Assistance: A Development and Foreign Policy Strategic Asset (CSIS, October 2012) and    U.S.-China Parallel Development Assistance Goals: Building on Common Interests (CSIS, March 2012).
Prior to CSIS, he worked in energy consulting and as a research associate at the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) in Washington, D.C. At CFR, he focused     on broad issues impacting U.S. grand strategy, the effect of emerging nations on U.S. foreign policy, as well as U.S.-Russia relations and NATO. In May     2010, he was selected as a fellow for the Manfred Worner Seminar. Mr. Savoy holds a B.A. with honors in history from George Washington University and an     M.A. in international relations from Boston University. He is a term member of the Council on Foreign Relations.    