Amy Celico
Senior Associate (Non-resident), Simon Chair in Political EconomyExpertise: Asia, Asian Economics, China, Economics, Trade and International BusinessAssociated Programs: Simon Chair in Political EconomyAmy Celico is a principal at ASG, leading the firm’s China and East Asia practice in Washington, D.C., and bringing more than 20 years of experience on issues in the region to her work with clients. Ms. Celico develops and implements tailored strategies for clients, helping them deepen relationships with key stakeholders, succeed with mergers and acquisitions transactions, resolve complex problems, and build and expand their business.
Prior to joining the firm, Ms. Celico served as senior director for China affairs at the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, where she was responsible for developing negotiating positions on issues related to China’s nonfinancial services sectors and intellectual property rights policies. She was also involved in developing trade policy positions for bilateral discussions with China through the Strategic Economic Dialogue and the U.S.-China Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade. Previously, Ms. Celico served as deputy director of the Office of the Chinese Economic Area at the U.S. Department of Commerce, where she monitored China’s compliance with its World Trade Organization commitments and developed U.S.-China trade policy to expand market access for U.S. companies in China. She also worked at the U.S. State Department, where she served as an intelligence analyst in the Bureau of Research and Intelligence, and as a vice consul for economic affairs at the U.S. consulate in Shanghai.
Prior to her government service, Ms. Celico was director of development for the Johns Hopkins University–Nanjing University Center for Chinese and American Studies. She also worked at the International Monetary Fund as the bilingual assistant to the executive director for China. She serves on the Board of Directors of the National Committee on U.S.-China Relations. Ms. Celico earned a B.A. with honors in Asian studies from Mount Holyoke College and completed her M.A. in international economics and strategic studies at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. She is also a graduate of the Hopkins-Nanjing Center in China. She speaks Mandarin Chinese and has spent seven years living and working in China.
    