Adam B. Mausner
Adjunct Fellow (Non-resident), International Security ProgramExpertise: Asia, China, Defense Strategy and Capabilities, Defense and Security, Europe, Geopolitics and International Security, Middle East, NATOAssociated Programs: International Security ProgramAdam Mausner is a nonresident fellow with the International Security Program at CSIS, where he specializes in Stability Operations, (including the conflicts in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and Syria), with a focus on local security force development. He is currently on rotation at the U.S. Department of Defense as a policy adviser in the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy (OSD-P), focused on Stability Operations and UN peacekeeping. Previously, Mausner spent three years at OSD-P as an Afghanistan country director, focused on the development of Afghan security forces, congressional affairs, detainee affairs, security metrics, women in the Afghan security forces, and legal and policy authorities. As a CSIS fellow, he has conducted research on European security, energy issues, security developments in the Middle East and China, and the U.S. defense budget. From 2007 to 2012, he was a fellow with the Burke Chair in Strategy at CSIS, where he coauthored a number of books, including Afghan National Security Forces: What It Will Take to Implement the ISAF Strategy (2010), Iraq and the United States: Creating a Strategic Partnership (2010), Withdrawal from Iraq: Assessing the Readiness of Iraqi Security Forces (2009), Winning in Afghanistan: Creating Effective Afghan Security Forces (2009), and Iraqi Force Development: Conditions for Success, Consequences of Failure (2007). His CSIS articles/reports include “The War in Afghanistan: A Race Against Time, Resources, and the Enemy,” “Iraq and US Strategy in the Gulf: Shaping US Plans after Withdrawal,” and “Reforming ANSF Metrics.” Before joining CSIS, he worked at the Center for Security Studies, researching cybersecurity issues and helping to create a database of international treaties. He also worked for Columbia International Affairs Online as acting executive editor. Mausner received a B.A. in political science from Vassar College and studied at the King’s College London War Studies Department in 2002. He received a master’s degree in security studies from Georgetown University in 2008.    