Bo Kong
Senior Associate (Non-resident), Energy and National Security ProgramExpertise: Asia, Climate Change and Environmental Impacts, Energy and Geopolitics, Energy and Sustainability, Innovation and New Energy Sources, Markets, Trends, and OutlooksAssociated Programs: Energy and  National Security ProgramBo Kong is the ConocoPhillips Petroleum Professor of Chinese and Asian Studies and assistant professor at the University of Oklahoma’s College of International Studies. He is also senior fellow of the Foreign Policy Institute of the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS), a member of the Advisory Board for the Revenue Watch Institute, a member of the International Editorial Board for the Universiti of Kebangsaan Malaysia’s journal JEBAT: Malaysian Journal of History, Politics, and Strategic Studies, and a member of the ChinaFAQs Expert Group. Prior to joining the University of Oklahoma, he was an assistant research professor in the Energy, Resources, and Environment Program at SAIS and directed the program’s research on East Asia. He also built and ran the school’s Global Energy and Environment Initiative. Previously, he was a visiting scholar at the Institute for Global Dialogue in South Africa, a research fellow at the Center for Global Security of the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, and a research associate at the Shanghai WTO Affairs Consultation Center. In addition, he has provided consulting services to the World Wildlife Fund on Chinese mineral investments in the Congo River Basin and the Mekong River Basin and advised the Hess Corporation on strategy in China. With a B.A. in international trade from the Nankai University in China, he earned an M.A. in American foreign policy and economics and a Ph.D. in China studies from SAIS. He is the author of China’s International Petroleum Policy (Praeger Security International, 2010). Currently, his teaching and research interests focus on U.S.-China relations; the geopolitics of energy; energy, environment, and climate change in China; and Chinese foreign policy and China’s global quest for resources.    