Ethan Zindler
Senior Associate (Non-resident), Energy and National Security ProgramExpertise: Climate Change and Environmental Impacts, Energy and Sustainability, Governance and Rule of Law, Innovation and New Energy SourcesAssociated Programs: Energy and  National Security ProgramEthan Zindler is head of policy analysis at Bloomberg New Energy Finance (BNEF), the world’s leading provider of data, research, and news on the clean and low-carbon energy sector. He is charged with managing and expanding BNEF’s coverage of key policy developments around the globe impacting renewables, biofuels, and energy efficiency. He oversees BNEF research in the Americas. From 2006 to May 2010, Mr. Zindler served as BNEF’s head of North American research. In that role, he set the firm’s research agenda for the United States, Canada, and Mexico, while overseeing a regional team of analysts, researchers, and news writers. Based in Washington, his particular area of expertise is U.S. clean energy policy, and he has written extensively on the Obama administration’s moves on key regulations, as well as on legislation before Congress. Mr. Zindler serves as BNEF’s main spokesperson in North America and has been quoted extensively in the media, including in the Wall Street Journal, the Associated Press, Fortune, and elsewhere. He has spoken at numerous conferences including those organized by the United Nations, National Governors Association, Platts, and others. He has testified on clean energy issues before the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, as well as the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission. Mr. Zindler previously served in the White House Office of National Service. He worked at MTV, producing the channel’s news coverage of the 2000 presidential campaign for the online audience. He has covered two World Cup soccer tournaments as a freelance reporter, and he spent two years reporting on the controversy surrounding the proposed Cape Wind offshore wind farm. Mr. Zindler holds an M.B.A. from Columbia Business School and a B.A. from Georgetown University.    